Ten PrinciPles for  
WriTing clearly
  1.  Distinguish real grammatical rules from folklore (pp. 10–21).
  2.  Use subjects to name the characters in your story (pp. 46–52).
  3.  Use verbs to name their important actions (pp. 32–39).
  4.  Open your sentences with familiar units of information  
(pp. 68–70).
  5.  Get to the main verb quickly:
•	 Avoid	long	introductory	phrases	and	clauses	(pp.	145–146).
•	 Avoid	long	abstract	subjects	(pp.	146–147).
•	 Avoid	interrupting	the	subject-verb	connection	(p.	147).
  6.  Push	new,	complex	units	of	information	to	the	end	 
of the sentence (pp. 80–83).
  7.  Begin sentences that form a unit with consistent  
subjects/topics (pp. 72–74).
  8.  Be concise:
•	 Cut	meaningless	and	repeated	words	and	obvious	 
implications (pp. 127–129).
•	 Put	the	meaning	of	phrases	into	one	or	two	words	 
(pp. 129–130).
•	 Prefer	affirmative	sentences	to	negative	ones	 
(pp. 130–131).
  9.  Control	sprawl:
•	 Don’t	tack	more	than	one	subordinate	clause	onto	another	
(pp. 151–152).
•	 Extend	a	sentence	with	resumptive,	summative,	and	free	
modifiers	(pp.	153–155).
•	 Extend	a	sentence	with	coordinate	structures	after	verbs	
(pp. 156–157).
 10. Above	all,	write	to	others	as	you	would	have	others	write	 
to you (pp. 189–190).

Style
Lessons in Clarity and Grace
ElEvEnth Edition
Joseph M. Williams
The University of Chicago
Revised by
Joseph Bizup
Boston University
Boston    Columbus    Indianapolis    New    York    San    Francisco    Upper    Saddle    River    
Amsterdam    Cape    Town    Dubai    London    Madrid    Milan    Munich    Paris    Montreal    Toronto    
Delhi    Mexico    City    São    Paulo    Sydney    Hong    Kong    Seoul    Singapore    Taipei    Tokyo

To my mother and father
....English style, familiar but not coarse,
Elegant, but not ostentatious ...
—Samuel JohnSon
Senior Sponsoring Editor:  
    Katharine Glynn
Editorial Assistant: Rebecca Gilpin
Marketing Manager: Sandra McGuire
Production Manager: Meghan DeMaio
Project Coordination, Text  
    Design, and Electronic Page  
    Makeup: Chitra Ganesan,  
    PreMediaGlobal
Creative Director: Jayne Conte
Cover Designer: Suzanne Behnke
Printer/Binder: Edwards Brothers   
    Malloy
Cover Printer: Lehigh-Phoenix Color
Credits and acknowledgments borrowed from other sources and reproduced, with 
permission, in this textbook appear on the appropriate page within the text.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Williams, Joseph M.
    [Style] : Lessons in clarity and grace / Joseph M. Williams, The University of  
         Chicago ; revised by Joseph Bizup. — Eleventh edition.
        pages    cm
    Includes index.
    ISBN-13: 978-0-321-89868-5
    ISBN-10: 0-321-89868-0
    1. English language—Style. 2. English language—Technical English. 3. English  
language—Business English. 4. English language—Rhetoric. 5. Technical writing. 
6. Business writing. I. Bizup, Joseph, date-II. Title. 
    PE1421.W545 2012
    
808’.042—dc23
 2012041516
Copyright © 2014, 2010, and 2007 by Pearson Education, Inc. 
All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. This 
 publication is protected by Copyright, and permission should be obtained 
from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval 
system, or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
 photocopying, recording, or likewise. To obtain permission(s) to use material 
from this work, please submit a written request to Pearson Education, Inc., 
 Permissions Department, One Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458, 
or you may fax your request to 201-236-3290.
ISBN 
10: 0-321-89868-0
ISBN 13: 978-0-321-89868-5

iii
Contents
Preface    iv
Acknowledgments    viii
Part One Style as Choice 1
leSSon one Understanding Style    2
leSSon Two Correctness    9
Part twO Clarity                                                        27
leSSon Three Actions    28
leSSon Four Characters    46
leSSon Five Cohesion and Coherence    66
leSSon Six Emphasis    80
Part three Clarity of Form 97
leSSon Seven Motivation    98
leSSon eighT Global Coherence    113
Part FOur Grace                                                      125
leSSon nine Concision    126
leSSon Ten Shape    143
leSSon eleven Elegance    168
Part Five Ethics                                                        187
leSSon Twelve The Ethics of Style    188
Appendix I: Punctuation    207
Appendix II: Using Sources    230
Glossary    239
Suggested Answers 
247
Acknowledgments
    256
Index    257

iv
PrEfaCE
Most people won’t realize that writing is a craft.
You have to take your apprenticeship in it like anything else.
—KaTherine anne PorTer
the eleventh edition
Greg Colomb opened his preface to the tenth edition of this book 
by noting, “Though it should be Joe Williams writing these words 
and revising this edition, I am honored to do it in his place.” I can 
say  similarly,  it  should  be  Greg  writing  these  words  and  revising  
this edition, and I am honored to do it in his place. But my rela-
tionship to this book differs from Greg’s, and so my approach to 
revising  it  has  necessarily  differed  as  well.  For  nearly  three  dec-
ades, Greg shared with Joe a deep friendship and intellectual part-
nership that uniquely qualified him to serve as Joe’s proxy. I knew 
Joe, but I cannot base on that acquaintance any claim to editorial 
authority.  Instead,  I  was  guided  by  the  lessons  Joe  taught,  espe-
cially those about the compact between writers and readers.
Writers, Joe insisted, have a responsibility to their readers to 
write as clearly as they can; readers, in turn, owe to writers who 
fulfill this responsibility their full care and attention. “Why,” Joe 
asked, “are we so often right about the writing of others and so 
often  wrong  about  our  own?  It  is  because  we  all  read  into  our  
own writing what we want readers to get out of it.” Writers, Joe 
recognized, may know best what they want to say, but their read-
ers know best how well they’ve said it. Joe therefore urged writ-
ers  to  trust  the  judgments  of  their  readers—who,  lacking  direct  
access to writers’ minds, have just “the words on the page” to go 
on.  In  the  care  he  gave  this  book  over  decades,  Joe  more  than  
met  his  responsibility  to  his  readers.  I’ve  tried  to  meet  mine  to  
him by viewing the words on his pages respectfully but also with 
fresh eyes.

v
                                                                                                              Preface                                                                                                              v
What’s New
Most  obviously,  I  reordered  the  lessons.  In  revising  the  later  
 editions  of Style,  Joe  increasingly  emphasized  the  importance  of  
global or document-level features of texts. To the seventh edition, 
he  added  an  epilogue  on  motivating  readers,  framing  problems,  
and organizing documents. In the eighth edition, he expanded this 
material  into  two  epilogues  and  drew  an  explicit  connection  be-
tween the principles governing the clarity of sentences and those 
governing the coherence of paragraphs, sections, and documents. 
In  the  ninth  edition,  Joe  elevated  these  two  epilogues  to  the  sta-
tus of lessons: Lesson 10, “Motivating Coherence,” and Lesson 11,  
“Global  Coherence.”  In  keeping  with  this  trajectory,  I  moved  
these two lessons to the center of the book where they appear as 
 Lessons 7 and 8. Now, rather than moving from sentence-level to 
document-level  issues,  the  book  follows  the  logic  of  its  subtitle  
and proceeds from clarity to grace.
I  modified  the  exercises,  trimming  or  eliminating  some  and  
adding others. Most significantly, Lessons 3 through 12 now end 
with  new  exercises,  grouped  under  the  heading  “In  Your  Own  
Words,”  that  invite  writers  to  work  with  their  own  prose,  first  
alone and then with help from readers.
Throughout, I integrated revisions Greg made when preparing 
the fourth edition of Style: The Basics of Clarity and Grace (2012).
In response to readers’ suggestions, I streamlined some expla-
nations, updated some examples, eliminated some redundancies, 
and  removed  the  book’s  hallmark  “fixed/variable”  diagrams  from  
the bodies of the lessons. These diagrams now consistently appear 
in the “Summing Up” section at each lesson’s end. I also rectified 
lingering inaccuracies where I found them.
In the interest of concision, I trimmed some of the epigraphs 
and removed discussions of a few peripheral topics. From Lesson 9  
(formerly  7)  on  concision,  I  cut  the  discussion  of  novice  writers’  
“productive  redundancy”;  from  Lesson  11  (formerly  9)  on  ele-
gance, I cut the section on metaphor.
Finally,  I  did  a  fair  amount  of  line  editing.  Commenting  on  
his  own  line  editing  in  the  tenth  edition,  Greg  observed  that  Joe  
“would  never  forgive  even  the  smallest  infelicity  .  .  .  intentionally  
left behind.” I tried to hold myself also to that standard.

vi Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
What’s the Same
For  all  these  changes,  this  book  is  still  Joe’s,  and  it  continues  to  
address the same questions it always has:
•	What is it in a sentence that makes readers judge it as they do?
•	How do we diagnose our own prose to anticipate their judgments?
•	How do we revise a sentence so that readers will think better 
of it?
Joe explained the import of these questions in personal terms:
The standard advice about writing ignores those questions. It is 
mostly truisms like Make a plan, Don’t use the passive, Think of your 
audience—advice that most of us ignore as we wrestle ideas out onto 
the page. When I drafted this paragraph, I wasn’t thinking about you; 
I was struggling to get my own ideas straight. I did know that I would 
come back to these sentences again and again (I didn’t know that it 
would be for more than twenty-five years), and that it would be only 
then—as I revised—that I could think about you and discover the 
plan that fit my draft. I also knew that as I did so, there were some 
principles I could rely on. This book explains them.
Greg saw in this passage the essence of Style’s “enduring genius”: 
its insight that writers have at their disposal principles that allow 
them to reliably predict readers’ responses and to revise accord-
ingly. I’m struck also by Joe’s decision to present this insight not 
as an abstract pronouncement but through an anecdote about his 
own work as a writer.
Like Greg, I have preserved Joe’s personal voice, not just as a 
matter of style but because this voice is crucial to the book’s mes-
sage. Joe of course knew that every style, even the most transpar-
ent, is a choice. In choosing to load his text with what Greg called 
his “ubiquitous I’s,” Joe was embracing the limitations and strug-
gles  of  ordinary  writers  as  his  own.  If  the  longevity  of  Style  can  
be  attributed  to  the  advice  that  Joe  gives,  the  affection  the  book  
inspires  can  be  attributed  to  the  solidarity  with  his  readers  that  
Joe shows.
The  remaining  words  of  this  preface  belong  mostly  to  Joe.  
They’ve been modified only slightly, first by Greg and now by me, 
to  finesse  Joe’s  use  of  the  first  person  and  to  accommodate  our  
involvement in his text.

Principles, Not Prescriptions
The principles here may seem prescriptive, but that’s not how they 
are intended. They are meant to help you predict how readers will 
judge  your  prose  and  then  help  you  decide  whether  and  how  to  
revise it. As you try to follow those principles, you may write more 
slowly.  That’s  inevitable.  Whenever  we  reflect  on  what  we  write  
as we write it, we become self-conscious and lose the flow of that 
writing,  sometimes  to  the  point  of  near-paralysis.  It  passes.  And  
you  can  keep  these  principles  from  gumming  up  your  process  if  
you  remember  that  they  have  less  to  do  with  drafting  than  with  
revision. If there is a first principle of drafting, it is to ignore most 
of the advice about it.
Some PrerequiSiteS
To  learn  how  to  revise  efficiently  you  must  know  some  basic  
things:
•	You have to know a few grammatical terms: SubJecT, verb, 
noun, acTive, PaSSive, clauSe, PrePoSiTion, and coordinaTion. 
All grammatical terms are capitalized the first time they ap-
pear and are defined in the text or the Glossary.
•	You  have  to  learn  new  meanings  for  two  familiar  words:   
ToPic and STreSS.
•	You have to learn a few new words: nominalizaTion, meTadiS-
courSe, reSumPTive modiFier, SummaTive modiFier, and Free 
modiFier. It can be uncomfortable to learn new terms, but the 
only way to avoid that is never to learn anything new.
Finally, if you read this book on your own, go slowly. It is not 
an amiable essay to read in a sitting or two. Take the lessons a few 
pages at a time. Do the exercises. Edit someone else’s writing, then 
some  of  your  own  written  a  few  weeks  ago,  then  something  you  
wrote that day.
An Instructor’s  Manual  is  available  for  those  who  are  inter-
ested in the scholarly and pedagogical thinking that has gone into 
Style.
JoSePh bizuP
boSTon, maSSachuSeTTS
                                                                                                              Preface                                                                                                              vii

viii
Acknowledgments
JB—
Many people contributed to this edition, and it is my privilege to 
recognize them here. I thank Katharine Glynn at Pearson Educa-
tion for offering me this project and for the benefit of her editorial 
wisdom; Meghan DeMaio, also at Pearson Education, for coordi-
nating  the  book’s  production;  and  Chitra  Ganesan  at  PreMedia-
Global for her work preparing the text.
I  thank  my  colleagues,  especially  those  in  the  CAS  Writing  
Program at Boston University, for our many conversations about 
Joe  Williams’s  ideas.  And  I  owe  much  to  Heather  Barrett,  Amy  
Bennett-Zendzian, Kate Neilsen, and Casey Riley for their sugges-
tions, responses to my revisions, and help with proofreading.
I  thank  the  following  reviewers  for  their  comments  on  the  
tenth  edition:  David  Alvarez,  DePauw  University;  James  Baker,  
Texas  A&M  University;  Emily  Belanger,  Brigham  Young  Univer-
sity; Rachel Crawford, University of San Francisco; Christine Cuc-
ciarre,  University  of  Delaware;  Kathleen  McGinnis,  University  of  
Washington;  Amy  Ferdinandt  Stolley,  Saint  Xavier  University;  
Matt   Hearn.   Lipscomb   University;   Beth   Hedengren,   Brigham   
Young  University;  Barbara  A  Heifferon,  Louisiana  State  Univer-
sity;  Heather  M.  Hoover,  Milligan  College;  Andrew  W.  Keitt,  Uni-
versity of Alabama at Birmingham; Craig M. Lawson, University of 
Nebraska; Linda C. Macri, University of Maryland; Daniel Pendick, 
University of Maryland, College Park; Constance Rylance, Stanford 
University; Joseph Salvatore, The New School; Christopher Walsh, 
Boston University; and Rachel Weil, Cornell University.
I’m  deeply  grateful  to  Joe  Williams  for  the  time  we  spent  to-
gether  in  2008,  when  he  visited  the  writing  program  I  was  then  
directing. And I owe a tremendous debt to Greg Colomb, not only 
for  his  intellectual  and  professional  guidance,  but  also  for  his  
friendship.
Finally,  I  thank  Annmarie,  Grace,  and  Charlotte  for  the  love  
and joy we share together.

GGC (from the tenth edition)—
I  want  to  thank  Ginny  Blanford  and  everyone  at  Pearson  Long-
man  for  the  opportunity  to  continue  what  Joe  Williams  began.   
I share many of the debts Joe mentions in his acknowledgments, 
and I will let him name them himself. I owe Jon D’Errico for cov-
ering  for  me  while  I  was  squirreled  away  with  this  manuscript,  
and I owe my family an apology for having two book manuscripts 
due on the same day. Sandra, Robin, Karen, and Lauren are used 
to indulging these absences, but they know they are always in my 
heart.
JmW (from the ninth edition)—
So  many  have  offered  support  and  suggestions  over  the  last  
twenty-five  years,  that  I  cannot  thank  you  all.  But  again  I  begin  
with  those  English  194  students  who  put  up  with  faintly  dittoed  
pages (that tells you how many years ago this book was born) and 
with a teacher who at times was at least as puzzled as they.
I have learned from the undergraduate, graduate and profes-
sional  students,  and  post-docs  who  have  gone  through  the  Little  
Red  Schoolhouse  writing  program  at  the  University  of  Chicago  
(a.k.a. Advanced Academic and Professional Writing). I am equally 
grateful to the graduate students who taught these principles and 
offered good feedback.
I have intellectual debts to those who broke ground in psycholin-
guistics,  text  linguistics,  and  functional  sentence  perspective.  Those  
who keep up with such matters will recognize the influence of Charles 
Filmore, Jan Firbas, Nils Enkvist, Michael Halliday, Noam Chomsky, 
Thomas Bever, Vic Yngve, and others. The work of Eleanore Rosch 
has provided a rich explanation for why verbs should be actions and 
characters should be subjects. Her work in prototype semantics is a 
powerful theoretical basis for the kind of style urged here.
For reading earlier versions of this book, I thank Theresa Am-
mirati,  Yvonne  Atkinson,  Margaret  Batschelet,  Nancy  Barendse,  
Randy  Berlin,  Cheryl  Brooke,  Ken  Bruffee,  Christopher  Buck,  
Douglas Butturff, Donald Byker, Bruce Campbell, Elaine Chaika, 
Avon Crismore, Constance Gefvert, Darren Cambridge, Mark Can-
ada, Paul Contino, Jim Garrett, Jill Gladstein, Karen Gocsik, Rich-
ard  Grande,  Jeanne  Gunner,  Maxine  Hairston,  George  Hoffman,  
Rebecca  Moore  Howard,  John  Hyman,  Sandra  Jamieson,  Rich-
ard Jenseth, Elizabeth Bourque Johnson, Julie Kalish, Seth Katz, 
                                                                                             Acknowledgments                                                                                             ix

x Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Bernadette  Longo,  Ted  Lowe,  Brij  Lunine,  Richard  McLain,  Joel  
Margulis, Susan Miller, Linda Mitchell, Ellen Moody, Ed Moritz, 
Patricia  Murray,  Neil  Nakadate,  Janice  Neuleib,  Ann  Palkovich,  
Matthew Parfitt, Donna Burns Philips, Mike Pownall, Peter Priest, 
John  Ruszkiewicz,  Margaret  Shaklee,  Nancy  Sommers,  Laura  
Bartlett  Snyder,  John  Taylor,  Mary  Taylor,  Bill  Vande  Kopple,  
Stephen Witte, Joseph Wappel, Alison Warriner, Wendy Wayman, 
Patricia Webb, and Kevin Wilson.
I  am  grateful  for  the  feedback  from  the  class  taught  by  Stan  
Henning at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, and for the er-
ror in usage caught by Linda Ziff. I am particularly indebted to an 
exchange with Keith Rhodes about Lesson 12.
I am indebted to James Vanden Bosch for the Montaigne quo-
tation  in  the  Glossary  and  to  Virginia  Tufte’s  The  Syntax  of  Style 
for  the  W.H.  Gass  quotation  that  serves  as  an  epigraph  to  Lesson  
12.  I  thank  Frederick  C.  Mish  of  the  G.  &  C.  Merriam  Company  
for locating the best examples of three citations in Lesson 2, and 
Charles Bazerman, for leading me to the first paragraph of Crick 
and  Watson’s DNA paper in Lesson 9.
For several years, I have had the good fortune to work with a 
good  colleague  and  friend  whose  careful  thinking  has  helped  me  
think better about many matters, both professional and personal, 
Don  Freeman.  Don’s  readings  have  saved  me  from  more  than  a  
few howlers; I am indebted to him for the epigraph from William 
Blake in Lesson 10.
And  again,  those  who  contribute  to  my  life  more  than  I  let  
them know: Oliver, Michele, and Eleanor; Chris and Ingrid; Dave, 
Patty, Owen, and Matilde; Megan, Phil, Lily and Calvin; and Joe, 
Christine,  Nicholas,  and  Katherine.  And  at  beginning  and  end  
still,  Joan,  whose  patience  and  love  flow  more  generously  than  I  
deserve.

                                                                                             Acknowledgments                                                                                             xi
in MeMOriaM
Joseph M. Williams, 1933–2008
il miglior fabbro [the best craftsman]
(by Gregory G. Colomb)
On February 22, 2008 the world lost a great scholar and 
teacher, and I lost a dear friend. For almost thirty years, Joe 
Williams and I taught together, researched together, wrote 
together, drank together, traveled together, and argued to-
gether and apart. When those “apart” arguments led to 
what in the last edition he called “our intemperate shouting 
matches,” we grew closer—and wrote more thoughtfully—
than ever. I knew his faults, but he was the best man I knew.
My  epitaph  for  Joe—il  miglior  fabbro—puts  him  in  ex-
alted  company:  I  take  it  from  Dante,  who  applied  it  to  the  
twelfth-century  troubadour  Arnaut  Daniel,  praised  by  Plu-
tarch as the “Grand Master” of his craft. In the last century, 
T.S.  Eliot  famously  said  it  of  Ezra  Pound.  Of  course,  these  
poets  were  all  known  not  for  their  clarity  and  grace  but  for  
their  depth  and  difficulty.  No  matter,  there  have  been  none  
better  than  they  at  their  craft,  just  as  there  have  been  none  
better than Joe at his. And Joe has the added distinction that 
his craft daily multiplies its good a thousand fold and more, 
in  all  those  papers,  reports,  memos,  and  other  documents  
that have served their readers better because of him.
in MeMOriaM
Gregory G. Colomb, 1951–2011
Our greatest happiness does not depend on the condition of 
life in which chance has placed us, but is always the result  
of a good conscience, good health, occupation, and freedom  
in all just pursuits.
Greg’s daughters chose these words from Thomas Jeffer-
son as his epitaph, and in his life Greg certainly embodied 
the ideal Jefferson evokes. But Jefferson’s words are more 
apt than perhaps his daughters knew, for in their origi-
nal context in Notes on the State of Virginia, they appear 

xii Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
not as an airy sentiment but as a concrete proposal about 
 education, the enterprise to which Greg devoted his life.  
Greg was the finest of teachers, and he taught countless 
 students—and lawyers, and accountants, and journalists, and 
even professors—to think and write better. He also taught 
those of us who knew him to live better. Uncompromising 
in his intellectual and scholarly standards, he was unstint-
ing in his professional and personal generosity. He possessed 
a supreme self-confidence, and he was confident enough 
to sincerely admire others. He laughed easily and was the 
best storyteller I knew. Greg taught many lessons—the most 
 important of these he taught by his example.

Part One
Style as Choice
Have something to say, and say it as clearly as you can. 
That is the only secret of style.
—Matthew arnold

2
Essentially style resembles good manners. It comes of endeavouring 
to understand others, of thinking for them rather than yourself— 
or thinking, that is, with the heart as well as the head.
—Sir arthur Quiller-CouCh
The great enemy of clear language is insincerity.
—GeorGe orwell
In matters of grave importance, style, not sincerity, is the vital thing.
—oSCar wilde
Clarity and Understanding
This book rests on two beliefs: it is good to write clearly, and any-
one can do it. The first is self-evident, especially to those who read 
a lot of writing like this:
An understanding of the causal factors involved in excessive drinking 
by students could lead to their more effective treatment.
But that second belief may seem optimistic to those who want to 
write clearly but can’t get close to this:
We could more effectively treat students who drink excessively if we 
understood why they do so.
Lesson 
1
Understanding Style

 Lesson 1 Understanding Style 3
Of course, writing fails for reasons more serious than unclear 
sentences. We bewilder readers when we can’t organize  complex 
ideas coherently (an issue I address in Lesson 8). And they won’t 
even read what we’ve written unless we motivate them to (an is-
sue I address in Lesson 7). But once we’ve formulated our claims, 
organized supporting reasons, grounded them on sound evidence, 
and motivated readers to read attentively, we must still express it 
all clearly, a difficult task for most writers and a daunting one for 
many.
It is a problem that has afflicted generations of writers who 
have hidden their ideas not only from their readers, but some-
times even from themselves. When we read that kind of writ-
ing in government regulations, we call it bureaucratese; in legal 
documents, legalese; in academic writing that inflates small ideas 
into gassy abstractions, academese. Written carelessly or, worse, 
deliberately, it is in its extreme forms a language of exclusion 
that a democracy cannot tolerate. It is also a problem with a long 
history.
a short history of UnClear Writing
It wasn’t until about the middle of the sixteenth century that writ-
ers decided that English was eloquent enough to replace Latin and 
French in serious discourse. But their first efforts were written in 
a style so complex that it defeated easy understanding:
If use and custom, having the help of so long time and continuance 
wherein to [re]fine our tongue, of so great learning and experience 
which furnish matter for the [re]fining, of so good wits and judg-
ments which can tell how to refine, have griped at nothing in all that 
time, with all that cunning, by all those wits which they won’t let go 
but hold for most certain in the right of our writing, that then our 
tongue has no certainty to trust to, but write all at random.
—Richard Mulcaster, The First Part of the Elementary, 1582
In the next century, English became the language of science. 
We might expect scientists to communicate the facts clearly and 
simply, but the complex style had spread to their writing as well. 
As one complained,
Of all the studies of men, nothing may sooner be obtained than this 
vicious abundance of phrase, this trick of metaphors, this volubility 
of tongue which makes so great a noise in the world.
—Thomas Sprat, History of the Royal Society, 1667

4 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
When this continent was settled, writers might have estab-
lished a new, democratic prose style for a new, democratic nation. 
In fact, in 1776, the plain words of Thomas Paine’s Common Sense 
helped inspire our Revolution:
In the following pages I offer nothing more than simple facts, plain 
arguments, and common sense.
Sad to say, he sparked no revolution in our national prose style.
A half century later, James Fenimore Cooper complained 
about our writing:
The love of turgid expressions is gaining ground, and ought to be 
corrected. One of the most certain evidences of a man of high breed-
ing, is his simplicity of speech: a simplicity that is equally removed 
from vulgarity and exaggeration. . . . Simplicity should be the firm 
aim, after one is removed from vulgarity. . . . In no case, however, 
can one who aims at turgid language, exaggerated sentiments, or 
pedantic utterances, lay claim to be either a man or a woman of the 
world.
—James Fenimore Cooper, The American Democrat, 1838
Unfortunately, in abusing that style, Cooper adopted it. Had he 
followed his own advice, he might have written,
We should discourage those who promote turgid language. A well-
bred person speaks simply, in a way that is neither vulgar nor exag-
gerated. No one can claim to be a man or woman of the world who 
deliberately exaggerates sentiments or speaks in ways that are turgid 
or pedantic.
About fifty years later, Mark Twain wrote what we now con-
sider classic American prose. He said this about Cooper’s style:
There have been daring people in the world who claimed that 
 Cooper could write English, but they are all dead now—all dead but 
 Lounsbury [an academic who praised Cooper’s style]. . . . [He] says 
that Deerslayer is a “pure work of art.” . . . [But] Cooper wrote about 
the poorest English that exists in our language, and . . . the English of 
Deerslayer is the very worst tha[t] even Cooper ever wrote.
As much as we admire Twain’s directness, few of us emulate it.
In the best-known modern essay on English style, “Politics 
and the English Language,” George Orwell anatomized the turgid 
language of politicians, bureaucrats, academics, and others:
The keynote [of a pretentious style] is the elimination of simple verbs. 
Instead of being a single word, such as break, stop, spoil, mend, kill, a 
verb becomes a phrase, made up of a noun or adjective tacked on to 

 Lesson 1 Understanding Style 5
some general-purposes verb such as prove, serve, form, play, render. 
In addition, the passive voice is wherever possible used in preference 
to the active, and noun constructions are used instead of gerunds (by 
examination of instead of by examining).
But as Cooper did, in abusing that style Orwell adopted it. He 
could have written more concisely:
 
Pretentious writers avoid simple verbs. Instead of using one word, 
such as break, stop, kill, they turn the verb into a noun or adjective, 
then tack onto it a general-purpose verb such as prove, serve, form, 
play, render. Wherever possible, they use the passive voice instead of 
the active and noun constructions instead of gerunds (by examination 
instead of by examining).
If the best-known critic of a turgid style could not resist it, we 
ought not be surprised that politicians and academics embrace it. 
On the language of the social sciences:
A turgid and polysyllabic prose does seem to prevail in the social sci-
ences. . . . Such a lack of ready intelligibility, I believe, usually has 
little or nothing to do with the complexity of thought. It has to do 
almost entirely with certain confusions of the academic writer about 
his own status.
—C. Wright Mills, The Sociological Imagination
On the language of medicine:
It now appears that obligatory obfuscation is a firm tradition within 
the medical profession. . . . [Medical writing] is a highly skilled, cal-
culated attempt to confuse the reader. . . . A doctor feels he might 
get passed over for an assistant professorship because he wrote his 
papers too clearly—because he made his ideas seem too simple.
—Michael Crichton, New England Journal of Medicine
On the language of law:
In law journals, in speeches, in classrooms and in courtrooms, law-
yers and judges are beginning to worry about how often they have 
been misunderstood, and they are discovering that sometimes they 
can’t even understand each other.
—Tom Goldstein, New York Times
On the language of science:
There are times when the more the authors explain [about ape commu-
nication], the less we understand. Apes certainly seem capable of using 
language to communicate. Whether scientists are remains doubtful.
—Douglas Chadwick, New York Times

6 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Most of us first confront that kind of writing in textbook 
 sentences like this one:
Recognition of the fact that systems [of grammar] differ from one 
language to another can serve as the basis for serious consideration 
of the problems confronting translators of the great works of world 
literature originally written in a language other than English.
In about half as many words, that means,
When we recognize that languages have different grammars, we can 
consider the problems of those who translate great works of litera-
ture into English.
Generations  of  students  have  struggled  with  dense  writ-
ing, many thinking they weren’t smart enough to grasp a writer’s 
deep ideas. Some have been right about that, but more could have 
blamed the writer’s inability (or refusal) to write clearly. Many 
 students, sad to say, give up; sadder still, others learn not only to 
read that style but to write it, inflicting it in turn on their readers, 
thereby sustaining a 450-year-old tradition of unreadable writing.
some Private CaUses of UnClear Writing
Unclear writing is a social problem, but it often has private causes. 
Michael Crichton mentioned one: some writers plump up their 
prose, hoping that complicated sentences indicate deep thought. 
And when we want to hide the fact that we don’t know what we’re 
talking about, we typically throw up a tangle of abstract words in 
long, complex sentences.
Others write graceless prose not deliberately but because they 
are seized by the idea that good writing must be free of the kind 
of  errors that only a grammarian can explain. They approach a 
blank page not as a space to explore ideas, but as a minefield of 
potential errors. They creep from word to word, concerned less 
with their readers’ understanding than with their own survival. I 
address that issue in Lesson 2.
Others write unclearly because they freeze up, especially when 
they are learning to think and write in a new academic or profes-
sional setting. As we struggle to master new ideas, most of us write 
worse than we do when we write about things we understand bet-
ter. For this, there is no remedy but experience.
But the biggest reason most of us write unclearly is that we 
don’t know when readers will think we are unclear, much less 
why. Our own writing always seems clearer to us than to our 
 readers, because we read into it what we want them to get out of it.  

 Lesson 1 Understanding Style 7
And so instead of revising our writing to meet their needs, we send 
it off the moment it meets ours.
In all of this, of course, is a great irony: we are likely to con-
fuse others when we write about a subject that confuses us. But 
when we become confused by a complex style, we too easily as-
sume that its complexity signals deep thought, and so we try to 
imitate it, compounding our already confused writing. This book 
shows you how to avoid both ends of that trap.
on Writing and reading
This is a book about writing based on our ways of reading. Once 
you understand why you judge one sentence to be dense and ab-
stract and another clear and direct, you will know how to recog-
nize not only when others’ writing is more complex than deep and 
but when yours may be as well. The problem is, none of us can 
judge our own writing as others will because we respond less to 
the words on the page than to the thoughts in our minds. You can 
avoid that trap once you learn how the words you have put on the 
page make your readers feel as they do.
You can also do something for yourself: the principles here 
also serve you as you read. When you encounter difficult prose, 
you will know what to look for on the page to determine whether 
your difficulty comes from the necessary complexity of the mate-
rial or the gratuitous complexity of the writing. If the latter, use 
these principles to help you mentally revise the abstract and indi-
rect writing of others into something you can better understand 
(while giving yourself the silent satisfaction of knowing that you 
could have written it more clearly).
on Writing and reWriting
A warning: if you think about these principles as you draft, you 
may never finish drafting. Most experienced writers get some-
thing down as fast as they can. Then as they revise that first draft 
into something clearer, they understand their ideas better. And 
when they understand their ideas better, they express them more 
clearly, and the more clearly they express them, the better they 
understand them . .  . and so it goes, ending only when they run out 
of energy, interest, or time.
For a fortunate few, that end comes weeks, months, even years 
after they begin. For most of us, though, the deadline is closer to 
tomorrow morning. And so we have to settle for prose that is less 

8 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
than perfect, but as good as we can make it in the time we have. 
(Perfection may be the ideal, but it is the death of done.)
So use what you find here not as rules to impose on every 
sen tence as you draft it, but as principles to help you identify 
 sentences likely to give your readers a problem, and then to revise 
them.
As important as clarity is, though, some occasions call for 
more:
Now the trumpet summons us again—not as a call to bear arms, 
though arms we need; not as a call to battle, though embattled we 
are; but a call to bear the burden of a long twilight struggle, year in 
and year out, “rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation,” a struggle 
against the common enemies of man: tyranny, poverty, disease and 
war itself.
—John F. Kennedy, Inaugural Address, January 20, 1961
Few of us are called upon to write a presidential address, but 
even on less lofty occasions, some of us take a private pleasure in 
 writing a shapely sentence, even if no one will notice. If you enjoy 
not just writing a sentence but crafting it, you will find sugges-
tions in Part Four. 
Writing is also a social act that might or might not serve the 
best interests of readers, so in Lesson 12, I address some issues 
about the ethics of style. In Appendix I, I discuss styles of punctua-
tion. In Appendix II, I explain how to use and cite quotations and 
other material from sources.
Many years ago, H. L. Mencken wrote this:
With precious few exceptions, all the books on style in English are by 
writers quite unable to write. The subject, indeed, seems to exercise a 
special and dreadful fascination over school ma’ams, bucolic college 
professors, and other such pseudoliterates. . . . Their central aim, of 
course, is to reduce the whole thing to a series of simple rules—the 
overmastering passion of their melancholy order, at all times and 
everywhere.
Mencken was right: no one learns to write well by rule, espe-
cially those who cannot see or feel or think. But I know that many 
do see clearly, feel deeply, and think carefully but cannot write 
sentences that make their thoughts, feelings, and visions clear 
to others. I also know that the more clearly we write, the more 
clearly we see and feel and think. Rules help no one do that, but 
some principles can.
Here they are.

9
God does not much mind bad grammar, but He does not  
take any particular pleasure in it.
—Erasmus
No grammatical rules have sufficient authority to control the firm 
and established usage of language. Established custom, in speaking 
and writing, is the standard to which we must at last resort for 
determining every controverted point in language and style.
—HugH Blair
English usage is sometimes more than mere taste, judgment, and 
education—sometimes it’s sheer luck, like getting across the street.
—E. B. WHitE
Understanding CorreCtness
To a careful writer, nothing is more important than choice. For 
example, which of these sentences would you choose to write if 
you wanted readers to think you wrote clearly?
  1.  Lack of media support was the cause of our election loss.
  2. We lost the election because the media did not support us.
Most of us would choose (2).
Lesson 
2
Correctness

10 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Unlike clarity, though, correctness seems a matter not of 
choice, but of obedience. That lack of choice does seem to sim-
plify things: “Correctness” requires not sound judgment but only 
a good memory. If we  remember, say, that irregardless is always 
wrong, we have nothing to choose. Some teachers and editors 
think we should memorize dozens of such “rules”:
• Never begin a sentence with and or but.
•	Never use double negatives.
•	Never split 
infinitivEs.
The truth is, however, more complicated. Some rules are 
real—if we ignore them, we risk being labeled at least unschooled: 
our vErBs must agree with suBjEcts; our pronouns must agree 
with their referents. (Words set in small capitals are defined in the  
Glossary.) There are many others. But many often-repeated rules 
are less  important than many think, and some are not even real 
rules. If you obsess over them all, you prevent yourself from  
writing quickly and clearly. That’s why I address “correctness” 
now, before clarity, because I want to put it where it belongs— 
behind us.
rUles of grammar and the Basis  
of their aUthority
Opinion is split on the social role of grammar rules. To some, 
they are just another device that the Ins use to control the Outs 
by  stigmatizing their language and thereby suppressing their  
social and political aspirations. To others, the rules of Standard 
English have been so refined by generations of educated speakers 
and writers that they must be observed by all the best writers of 
English.
Both views are correct, partly. For centuries, those governing 
our affairs have used grammatical “errors” to screen out those 
unwilling or unable to acquire the habits of the schooled middle 
class. But the critics are wrong to claim that those rules were 
 devised for that end. Standard forms of a language originate in 
accidents of geography and economic power. When a language 
has different regional dialects, that of the most powerful speakers 
usually becomes the most prestigious and the basis for a nation’s 
“correct” writing.

 Lesson 2 Correctness 11
Thus if Edinburgh rather than London had become the center 
of Britain’s economic, political, and literary life, we would speak 
and write less like Shakespeare and more like the Scottish poet 
Bobby Burns:
A ye wha are sae guid yourself (All you who are so good yourselves
Sae pious and sae holy, So pious and so holy,
Ye’ve nought to do but mark You’ve nothing to do but talk  
    and    tell        about
Your neebours’ fauts and folly! Your neighbors’ faults and folly!)
Conservatives, on the other hand, are right that many rules of 
Standard English originated in efficient expression. For example, 
we no longer use all the endings that our verbs required a thou-
sand years ago. We now omit present tense inflections in all but 
one context (and we don’t need it there):
1st Person2nd Person3rd Person
SingularI know + ø.You know + ø.She know + S.
PluralWe know + ø.You know + ø.They know + ø.
But those conservatives are wrong when they claim that Stan-
dard English has been refined by the logic of educated speakers 
and writers, and so must by its very nature be socially and morally 
superior to the debased language of their alleged inferiors.
True, many rules of Standard English do reflect an evolution 
toward logical efficiency. But if by logical we mean regular and 
therefore predictable, then Standard English is in many ways less 
logical than nonstandard English. For example, the Standard Eng-
lish contraction in I’m here, aren’t I? is aren’t. But what could be 
more ungrammatical than the full form, I am here, are I not? Logi-
cally, we should contract am + not to amn’t, which is in fact one 
historical source of the nonstandard ain’t (the other is are + not). 
So the standard aren’t I is less logical than the historically predict-
able but socially stigmatized ain’t I. I could cite a dozen examples 
where the violation of a rule of Standard English reflects a logical 
mind making English grammar more consistent.
But it is, of course, the very inconsistency of Standard English 
that makes its rules so useful to those who would use them to dis-
criminate: to speak and write Standard English, we must either be 
born into it or invest years learning it (along with the values of its 
speakers).

12 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Here’s the point: Those determined to discriminate will 
seize on any difference. But our language seems to reflect  
the quality of our minds more directly than do our ZIP 
codes, so it’s easy for those inclined to look down on others 
to think that grammatical “errors” indicate mental or moral 
deficiency. But that belief is not just factually wrong; in a 
 democracy like ours, it is socially destructive. Yet even if ain’t 
is logically correct, so great is the power of social  convention 
that we avoid it, at least if we hope to be taken seriously 
when we write for serious purposes.
three Kinds of rUles
These corrosive social attitudes about correctness have been 
 encouraged by generations of grammarians who, in their zeal to 
codify “good” English, have confused three kinds of “rules.”
1. Real Rules
Real rules define what makes English English: articlEs must pre-
cede nouns: the book, not book the. Speakers born into English 
don’t think about these rules at all when they write, and violate 
them only when they are tired or distracted.
2. Social Rules
Social rules distinguish Standard English from nonstandard: He 
doesn’t have any money versus He don’t have no money. Schooled 
writers observe these rules as naturally as they observe the Real 
Rules and think about them only when they notice others violat-
ing them. The only writers who self-consciously try to follow them 
are those not born into Standard English who are striving to rise 
into the educated class.
3. Invented Rules
Finally, some grammarians have invented a handful of rules that 
they think we all should observe. These are the rules that the gram-
mar police love to enforce and that too many educated writers ob-
sess over. Most date from the last half of the eighteenth century:
Don’t split infinitives, as in to quietly leave.
Don’t end a sentence with a 
prEposition.

 Lesson 2 Correctness 13
A few date from the twentieth century:
Don’t use hopefully for I hope, as in Hopefully, it won’t rain.
Don’t use which for that, as in a car which I sold.
For 250 years, grammarians have accused the best writers of 
violating rules like these, and for 250 years the best writers have 
ignored them. Which is lucky for the grammarians, because if 
writers did obey all the rules, grammarians would have to keep 
inventing new ones, or find another line of work. The fact is, none 
of these invented rules reflects the unself-conscious usage of our 
best writers.
In this lesson, we focus on this third kind of rule, the handful 
of invented ones, because only they vex those who already write 
Standard English.
oBserving rUles thoUghtfUlly
It is no simple matter to deal with these invented rules if you want 
to be thought of as someone who writes “correctly.” You could 
choose the worst-case policy: follow all the rules all the time 
 because sometime, someone will criticize you for something—for 
beginning a sentence with and or ending it with up.
But if you try to obey all the rules all the time, you risk 
 becoming so obsessed with rules that you tie yourself in knots. 
And sooner or later, you will impose those rules—real or not—on 
others. After all, what good is learning a rule if all you can do is 
obey it?
The alternative to blind obedience is selective observance. 
But then you have to decide which rules to observe and which to 
ignore. And if you ignore an alleged rule, you may have to deal 
with someone whose passion for “good” grammar makes her see 
in your split infinitive a sign of moral corruption and social decay.
If you want to avoid being accused of “lacking standards,” but 
refuse to submit to whatever “rule” someone can dredge up from 
ninth-grade English, you have to know more about these invented 
rules than the rule-mongers do. The rest of this lesson helps you 
do that.
two Kinds of invented rUles
We can sort most invented rules into two groups: Folklore and 
 Elegant  Options.

14 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Quick Tip:   This rule about because has no basis in 
grammar, but it does reflect a small stylistic truth. In  Lesson 5,  
we look at  a principle of style that tells us to arrange the 
elements of sentences so that information that readers know 
comes before less familiar information (for a summary, skim 
pp. 68–70). It is a fact of English style that a  
suBordinatE 
clausE  beginning  with  because  usually  introduces  new  
Folklore
These rules include those that most careful readers and writers 
 ignore. You may not yet have had some of them inflicted on you, 
but chances are that you will. In what follows, the quotations that 
illustrate “violations” of these rules are from writers of considerable 
intellectual and scholarly stature or who, on matters of usage, are 
reliable conservatives (some are both). A check mark indicates ac-
ceptable Standard English, despite what some grammarians claim.
  1.  “Don’t begin sentences with and or but.” This passage 
 ignores the “rule” twice:
✓ But, it will be asked, is tact not an individual gift, therefore highly 
variable in its choices? And if that is so, what guidance can a 
manual offer, other than that of its author’s prejudices—mere 
impressionism?
—Wilson Follett, Modern American Usage: A Guide,  
edited and completed by Jacques Barzun et al.
Some inexperienced writers do begin too many sentences with 
and, but that is an error not in grammar but of style.
Some insecure writers also think they should not begin a 
sentence with because. Allegedly not this:
✓ Because we have access to so much historical fact, today we know 
a good deal about changes within the humanities which were not 
apparent to those of any age much before our own and which the 
individual scholar must constantly reflect on.
—Walter Ong, S. J., “The Expanding Humanities and the Individual  
Scholar,” Publication of the Modern Language Association
This folklore about because appears in no handbook I know 
of, but it is gaining currency. It probably stems from advice 
aimed at avoiding sentence fragmEnts like this one:
 
The plan was rejected. Because it was incomplete.

 Lesson 2 Correctness 15
 information. Such a clause, therefore, usually comes at the 
end of a sentence:
✓ Some writers write graceless prose because they are seized 
by the idea that writing is good only when it’s free of errors 
that only a grammarian can explain.
Reverse that order and you get a mildly awkward sentence:
 Because some writers are seized by the idea that writing is 
good only when it’s free of errors that only a grammarian 
can explain, they write graceless prose.
If you want to begin a sentence with a clause expressing 
 familiar information about causation, introduce the clause 
with since, because since implies that the reader already 
knows what is in the clause:
✓ Since our language seems to reflect our quality of mind,  
it is easy for those inclined to look down on others to 
think that grammatical “errors” indicate mental or moral 
deficiency.
There are exceptions to this principle, but it’s generally 
sound.
  2.  “Use the relative pronoun that—not which—for  restrictive  
clauses.” Allegedly not this:
✓ Next is a typical situation which a practiced writer corrects “for 
style” virtually by reflex action.
—Jacques Barzun, Simple and Direct
Yet just a few sentences before, Barzun himself (one of our 
most eminent intellectual historians and critics of style) had 
asserted:
     Us[e]     that with defining [i.e., restrictive] clauses except when 
 stylistic reasons interpose.
(In the sentence quoted above, no such reasons interpose.)
This “rule” is relatively new. It appeared in 1906 in Henry 
and Francis Fowler’s The King’s English (Oxford University 
Press). The Fowlers thought that the random variation be-
tween that and which to begin a restrictive clause was messy, 
so they just asserted that henceforth writers should (with 
some exceptions) limit which to 
nonrEstrictivE clausEs.

16 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
A nonrestrictive clause, you may recall, modifies a noun 
naming a referent that you can identify unambiguously with-
out the information in that clause. For example:
✓
 
ABCO Inc. ended its first bankruptcy, which it had filed in 1997.
A company can have only one first bankruptcy, so we can un-
ambiguously identify the bankruptcy without the information 
in the following clause. We therefore call that clause nonre-
strictive, because it does not further “restrict” or identify what 
the noun names. In that context, we put a comma before the 
modifying clause and begin it with which. That rule is based 
on historical and contemporary usage.
But, claimed the Fowlers, for restrictive clauses we should 
use not which but only that. For example:
✓
 
ABCO Inc. sold a product that [not which] made millions.
Since ABCO presumably makes many products, the clause 
that made millions “restricts” the product to the one that made 
millions, and so, said the Fowlers, it should begin with that.
Francis died in 1918, but Henry continued the family tradi-
tion with A Dictionary of Modern English Usage (Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1926), where he made this wistful observation:
 Some there are who follow this principle now; but it would be 
idle to pretend that it is the practice either of most or of the best 
 writers. (p. 635)
(For another allegedly incorrect which, see the passage by 
Walter Ong on p. 14.)
I confess I follow Fowler’s advice, not because a restrictive 
which is an error, but because that has a softer sound. I do 
sometimes choose a which when it’s within a word or two of a 
that, because I don’t like the sound of two thats close together:
✓
 
We all have that one rule that we will not give up.
✓
 
We all have that one rule which we will not give up.
  3.  “Use fewer with nouns you count, less with nouns you can-
not.” Allegedly not this:
✓ I can remember no less than five occasions when the correspon-
dence columns of The Times rocked with volleys of letters . . .
—Noel Gilroy Annan, Lord Annan, “The Life of the Mind in  
British Universities Today,” American Council  
of Learned Societies Newsletter

 Lesson 2 Correctness 17
No one uses fewer with mass nouns (fewer dirt) but educated writ-
ers often use less with countable plural nouns (less resources).
  4.  “Use since and while to refer only to time, not to mean 
because or although.” Most careful writers use since with a 
meaning close to because but, as mentioned above, with an 
added sense of “What follows I assume you already know”:
✓
 
Since asbestos is dangerous, it should be removed carefully.
Nor do most careful writers restrict while to its temporal sense 
(We’ll wait while you eat), but also use it with a meaning close 
to “I assume you know what I state in this clause, but what I 
assert in the next will qualify it”:
✓
 
While we agree on a date, we disagree about the place.
Here’s the point: If writers whom we judge to be competent  
regularly violate some alleged rule and most careful readers 
never notice, then the rule has no force. In those cases, it is 
not writers who should change their usage, but grammarians 
who should change their rules.
Elegant Options
These next “rules” complement the Real Rules: call them Elegant 
Options. Most readers do not notice when you observe a Real 
Rule, but does when you violates it (like that). On the other hand, 
few readers notice when you violate one of these optional rules, 
but some do when you observe it, because doing so makes your 
writing seem just a bit more self-consciously formal.
  1.  “Don’t split infinitives.” Purists condemn Dwight MacDonald,  
a linguistic archconservative, for this sentence (my emphasis 
in all the examples that follow).
✓ One wonders why Dr. Gove and his editors did not think of label-
ing knowed as substandard right where it occurs, and one suspects 
that they wanted to slightly conceal the fact . . .
—“The String Untuned,” The New Yorker
They would require
 
they wanted to conceal slightly the fact . . .
Infinitives are split so often that when you avoid splitting one, 
careful readers may think you are trying to be especially cor-
rect, whether you are or not.

18 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
  2.  “Use whom as the object of a verb or preposition.” Purists 
would condemn William Zinsser for this use of who:
✓ Soon after you confront this matter of preserving your identity, 
another question will occur to you: “Who am I writing for?”
—On Writing Well
They would insist on
 
another question will occur to you: “For whom am I writing?”
Here is an actual rule: use who when it is the subject of a 
verb in its own clause; use whom only when it is an object in 
its own clause.
Quick Tip:    When a relative clause modifies a noun, the 
correct form is whom if you can delete the relative pronoun 
and still make sense:
✓ The committee chose someone whom they trusted.
✓ 
The committee chose someone [ ] they trusted.
If you cannot delete the who/whom, the correct form is who:
✓ The committee chose someone who earned their trust.
 
The committee chose someone [ ] earned their trust.
Two exceptions: (1) You cannot delete whom when it begins 
a clause that is the object of a verb. In that case, you have to 
depend on the grammar of the clause:
✓ The committee decided whom they should choose.
✓ 
The committee decided who was to be chosen.
(2) Always use whom as the object of a preposition:
 The  committee  chose  someone  in  whom  they  had  
confidence.
  3.  “Don’t end a sentence with a preposition.” Purists condemn  
Sir Ernest Gowers, editor of Fowler’s second edition, for this:
✓ The peculiarities of legal English are often used as a stick to beat 
the official with.
—The Complete Plain Words

 Lesson 2 Correctness 19
They insist on this:
 
. . . a stick with which to beat the official.
The first is correct; the second is more formal. (Again, see the 
Ong passage on p. 14.) And when you choose to shift both 
the preposition and its whom to the left, your sentence seems 
more  formal yet. Compare:
✓
 
The man I met with was the man I had written to.
✓
 
The man with whom I met was the man to whom I had written.
A preposition can, however, can end a sentence weakly (see  
pp. 83–84). George Orwell may have chosen to end this next sen-
tence with from to make a sly point about English  grammar, but  
I suspect it just ended up there (and note the “incorrect” which):
 [The defense of the English language] has nothing to do with .  .  .  
the setting up of a “standard English” which must never be 
 departed from.
—George Orwell, “Politics and the English Language”
This would have been less awkward and more emphatic:
 
We do not defend English just to create a “standard English” 
whose rules we must always obey.
  4.  “Use the singular with none and any.” None and any were 
originally singular, but today most writers use them as plural, 
so if you use them as singular, some readers will notice. The 
second sentence is a bit more formal than the first:
✓
 
None of the reasons are sufficient to end the project.
✓
 
None of the reasons is sufficient to end the project.
When you are under close scrutiny, you might choose to 
 observe all these optional rules. Ordinarily, though, they are 
ignored by most careful writers, which is to say they are not 
rules at all, but rather stylistic choices that create a slightly 
formal tone. If you adopt the worst-case approach and  observe 
them all, all the time, few readers will give you credit but 
many will notice how formal you seem.
Hobgoblins
For some unknown reason, a handful of items has become the 
 object of particularly zealous abuse. There’s no explaining why; 
none of them interferes with clarity or concision.

20 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
  1.  “Never use like for as or as if.” Allegedly, not this:
✓
 
These operations failed like the earlier ones did.
But this:
✓
 
These operations failed as the earlier ones did.
 Like became a 
suBordinating conjunction in the  eighteenth cen-
tury when writers began to drop as from the conjunctive phrase 
like as, leaving just like as the 
conjunction. This process is called 
elision, a common linguistic change. It is telling that the editor of 
the second edition of Fowler’s Dictionary (the one favored by con-
servatives) deleted like for as from Fowler’s list of “Illiteracies” and 
moved it into the category of “Sturdy Indefensibles.”
  2.  “Don’t use hopefully to mean ‘ I hope.’ ” Allegedly, not this:
✓
 
Hopefully, it will not rain.
But this:
✓
 
I hope that it will not rain.
 This “rule” dates from the middle of the twentieth century. It 
has no basis in logic or grammar and parallels the usage of other 
words that no one complains about, words such as candidly, 
frankly, sadly, and happily:
✓
 
Candidly, we may fail. (That is, I am candid when I say we may fail.)
✓
 
Seriously, we must go. (That is, I am serious when I say we must go.)
  3.  “Don’t use finalize to mean ‘finish’ or ‘complete.’” But 
 finalize doesn’t mean just “finish.” It means “to clean up the 
last few details,” a sense captured by no other word. More-
over, if we think finalize is bad because -ize is ugly, we would 
have to reject nationalize, synthesize, and rationalize, along 
with  hundreds of other useful words.
  4.  “Don’t use impact as a verb, as in The survey impacted our 
strategy. Use it only as a noun, as in The survey had an im-
pact on our strategy.” Impact has been a verb for 400 years, 
but on some people, historical evidence has none.
  5.  “Don’t modify absolute words such as perfect, unique, 
 final, or complete with very, more, quite, and so on.” That 
rule would have deprived us of this familiar sentence:
✓
 
We the People of the United States, in order to form a more perfect  
union . . .
(Even so, this is a rule generally worth following.)

 Lesson 2 Correctness 21
  6. “Never ever use irregardless for regardless or irrespective.” 
However arbitrary this rule is, follow it. Use irregardless and 
some will judge you irredeemable.
Some Words That Attract Special Attention
A few words are so often confused with others that careful readers 
are likely to note when you correctly distinguish them—flaunt and 
flout for example. When you use them correctly, those who think 
the difference matters are likely to note that at least you know 
that flaunt means “to display conspicuously” and that flout means 
“to scorn a rule or standard.” Thus if you chose to scorn the rule 
about flaunt and flout, you would not flout your flaunting it, but 
flaunt your flouting it. Here are some others:
aggravate means “to make worse.” It does not mean to “annoy.” You 
can aggravate an injury but not a person.
anticipate means “to prepare for a contingency.” It does not mean 
just “expect.” You anticipate a question when you prepare its an-
swer before it’s asked; if you know it’s coming but don’t prepare, 
you only expect it.
anxious means “uneasy” not “eager.” You’re eager to leave if you’re 
happy to go. You’re anxious about leaving if it makes you nervous.
blackmail means “to extort by threatening to reveal damaging informa-
tion.” It does not mean simply “coerce.” One country cannot blackmail 
another with nuclear weapons when it only threatens to use them.
cohort means “a group who attends on someone.” It does not mean 
a single accompanying person. When Prince William married  
Kate Middleton, she became his “consort”; his hangers-on are still 
his cohort.
comprise means “to include all parts in a single unit.” It is not syn-
onymous with constitute. The alphabet is not comprised by its let-
ters; it comprises them. Letters constitute the alphabet, which is 
thus constituted by them.
continuous means “without interruption.” It is not synonymous 
with continual, which means an activity continued through time, 
with interruptions. If you continuously interrupt someone, that 
person will never say a word because your interruption will never 
stop. If you continually interrupt, you let the other person finish a 
sentence from time to time.
disinterested means “neutral.” It does not mean “uninterested.” A 
judge should be disinterested in the outcome of a case, but not un-
interested in it. (Incidentally, the original meaning of disinterested 
was “to be uninterested.”)

22 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
enormity means “hugely bad.” It does not mean “enormous.” In pri-
vate, a belch might be enormous, but at a state funeral, it would 
also be an enormity.
fortuitous means “by chance.” It does not mean “fortunate.” You 
are fortunate when you fortuitously pick the right number in the 
lottery.
fulsome means “sickeningly excessive.” It does not mean just “much.” 
We all enjoy praise, except when it becomes fulsome.
notorious means “known for bad behavior.” It does not mean 
 “famous.” Frank Sinatra was a famous singer but a notorious 
bully.
These days only a few readers still care about these distinc-
tions, but they may be just those whose judgment carries weight 
when it matters most. It takes only a few minutes to learn to use 
these words in ways that testify to your precision, so it may be 
worth doing, especially if you also think their distinctions are 
worth preserving.
On the other hand, as a schooled writer, you are simply 
 expected to correctly distinguish imply and infer, principal and 
principle, accept and except, capital and capitol, affect and effect, 
proceed and precede, discrete and discreet. Most careful readers 
also notice when a Latinate or Greek plural noun is used as a sin-
gular, so you might want to keep these straight, too:
Singulardatumcriterionmediumstratumphenomenon
Pluraldatacriteriamediastrataphenomena
Here’s the point: You can’t predict good grammar or cor-
rect usage by logic or general rule. You have to learn the rules 
one-by-one and accept the fact that some of them, probably 
most of them, are arbitrary and idiosyncratic.
a ProBlem: PronoUns and gender Bias
Pronouns and Their Referents
We expect literate writers to make verbs agree with subjects:
✓
 
Our reasons arE based on solid evidence.

 Lesson 2 Correctness 23
We also expect their pronouns to agree with antecedents. Not this:
Early efforts to oppose the hydrogen bomb failed because it  ignored 
political issues. No one wanted to expose themselves to anti- 
Communist hysteria.
But this:
✓
 
Early efforts to oppose the hydrogen bomb failed because they 
ignored political issues. No one wanted to expose himself to anti-
Communist hysteria.
There are, however, two problems with making pronouns 
agree with their referents.
First, do we use a singular or plural pronoun when referring 
to a noun that is singular in grammar but plural in meaning? For 
example, when we refer to singular nouns such as a group, com-
mittee, staff, administration, and so on, do we use a singular or 
plural verb? Some writers use a singular verb and pronoun when 
the group acts as a single entity:
✓
 
The committee Has met but has not yet made its decision.
But they use a plural verb and pronoun when its members act 
individually:
✓
 
The faculty HavE the memo, but not all of them have read it.
These days plurals are irregularly used in both senses (but the plu-
ral is the rule in British English).
Second, what pronoun do we use, it or they, to refer to pro-
nouns such as someone, everyone, no one and to singular common 
nouns that signal no gender: teacher, doctor, student? We casually 
use they:
Everyone knows they must answer for their actions.
When a person is on drugs, it is hard to help them.
Formal usage requires a singular pronoun:
✓
 
Everyone realizes that he must answer for his actions.
But that rule raises the problem of biased language.
Gender and Biased Language
Common sense demands that we don’t gratuitously offend read-
ers, but if we reject he as a generic pronoun because it’s biased 
and they because some readers consider it ungrammatical, we are 

24 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
left with only bad choices. Some writers choose a clumsy he or 
she; others choose a worse he/she or even s/he:
If a writer ignores the ethnicity of his or her readers, s/he may re-
spond in ways the writer would not expect to words that to him or 
her are innocent of bias.
Some writers substitute plurals for singulars:
✓
 
When writers ignore their readers’ ethnicity, they may respond in 
ways they might not expect to words that are to them innocent of 
bias.
But in that sentence, they, their, and them are confusing, because 
they can refer either to writers or readers. To the careful ear, a 
sentence with singular nouns and pronouns seems a shade more 
precise:
When a writer ignores his reader’s ethnicity, his reader may re-
spond in ways that he might not expect to words that are to him 
innocent of bias.
We can try a first person we:
✓
 
If we ignore the ethnicity of our readers, they may respond in 
ways we would not expect to words that to us are innocent of bias.
But we can also be ambiguous. We could also try impersonal ab-
straction, but that creates its own problem:
Failure to consider ethnicity may lead to unexpected responses to 
words considered innocent of bias.
Finally, we can alternately use he and she, as I have. But that’s 
not a perfect solution either, because some readers find she as sty-
listically intrusive as he/she. A reviewer in the New York Times, for 
example, wondered what to make of an author whom the reviewer 
charged with attempting to
 
right history’s wrongs to women by referring to random examples as 
“she,” as in “Ask a particle physicist what happens when a quark is 
knocked out of a proton, and she will tell you . . .,” which strikes this 
reader as oddly patronizing to women.
(We might wonder how it strikes women who happen to be par-
ticle physicists.)
For years to come, we’ll have a problem with singular generic pro-
nouns, and to some readers, any solution will be awkward. I suspect 
that eventually we will accept the plural they as a correct singular:
✓
 
No one should turn in their writing unedited.

 Lesson 2 Correctness 25
Some claim that such compromises lead to lazy imprecision. 
Whatever the future, we have a choice now, and that’s not a bad 
thing, because our choices define who we are.
sUmming UP
We must write correctly, but if in defining correctness we ignore 
the difference between fact and folklore, we risk overlooking what 
is really important—the choices that make our writing dense and 
wordy or clear and concise. We are not precise merely because we 
get right which and that and avoid finalize and hopefully. Many 
who obsess on such details are oblivious to this more serious kind 
of imprecision:
Too precise a specification of information processing requirements 
incurs the risk of overestimation resulting in unused capacity or 
 inefficient use of costly resources or of underestimation leading  
to ineffectiveness or other inefficiencies.
That means:
✓
 
When you specify too precisely the resources you need to pro-
cess information, you may overestimate. If you do, you risk 
having more capacity than you need or using costly resources 
inefficiently.
Both are grammatically precise, but who would choose to read 
more of the first?
I suspect that those who observe all the rules all the time do so 
not because they want to protect the integrity of the language or 
the quality of our culture, but to assert a style of their own. Some 
of us are straightforward and plain speaking; others take plea-
sure in a bit of elegance, in a touch of fastidiously self-conscious 
“class.” It is an impulse we should not scorn, so long as it is not a 
pretext to discriminate and is subordinate to the more important 
matters to which we now turn—the choices that define not “good 
grammar” but clarity and grace.

This page intentionally left blank 

Part two
Clarity
Everything that can be thought at all  
can be thought clearly.  
Everything that can be said can be said clearly.
—Ludwig wittgenstein
It takes less time to learn to write nobly than to  
learn to write lightly and straightforwardly.
—Friedrich nietzsche

28
Suit the action to the word, the word to the action.
—wiLLiam shakespeare, Hamlet, 3.2
I am unlikely to trust a sentence that comes easily.
—wiLLiam gass
Understanding How we express  
JUdgments
We have words enough to praise writing we like—clear, direct, 
concise—and more than enough to abuse writing we don’t: un-
clear, indirect, abstract, dense, complex. We can use those words to 
distinguish these two sentences:
1a. The cause of our schools’ failure at teaching basic skills is not 
 understanding the influence of cultural background on learning.
1b. Our schools have failed to teach basic skills because they do not 
understand how cultural background influences the way a child learns.
Most of us would call (1a) too complex, (1b) clearer and more 
direct. But those words don’t refer to anything in those sentences; 
they describe how those sentences make us feel. When we say that 
(1a) is unclear, we mean that we have a hard time understanding 
it; we say it’s dense when we struggle to read it.
The problem is to understand what is in those two sentences 
that makes readers feel as they do. Only then can you rise above 
your too-good understanding of your own writing to know when 
Lesson 
3
Actions

 Lesson 3 Actions 29
your readers will think it needs revising. To do that, you have to 
know what counts as a well-told story. (To profit from this les-
son and the next three, you must be able to identify verbs, simpLe 
 subjects, and whoLe subjects. See the Glossary.)
telling stories aboUt CHaraCters  
and tHeir aCtions
This story has a problem:
 2a. Once upon a time, as a walk through the woods was taking place 
on the part of Little Red Riding Hood, the Wolf’s jump out from be-
hind a tree occurred, causing her fright.
We prefer something closer to this:
✓ 2b. Once upon a time, Little Red Riding Hood was walking through 
the woods, when the Wolf jumped out from behind a tree and fright-
ened her.
Most readers think (2b) tells its story more clearly than (2a), 
 because it follows two principles:
• Its main characters are subjects of verbs.
•	Those verbs express specific actions.
Principle of Clarity 1: Make Main Characters Subjects
Look at the subjects in (2a). The simple subjects (underlined) are 
not the main characters (italicized):
 2a. Once upon a time, as a walk through the woods was taking place 
on the part of Little Red Riding Hood, the Wolf’s jump out from be-
hind a tree occurred, causing her fright.
Those  subjects  do  not  name  characters;  they  name  actions  
 expressed in abstract nouns, walk and jump:
SubjectVerb
a walk through the woodswas taking place
the Wolf’s jump out from behind a treeoccurred
The whole subject of occurred does have a character in it: the 
Wolf’s jump. But the Wolf is not the subject. It is only attached to 
the simple subject jump. 

30 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Contrast those abstract subjects with these, where the charac-
ters (italicized) are also the simple subjects (underlined):
 2b. Once upon a time, Little Red Riding Hood was walking through 
the woods, when the Wolf jumped out from behind a tree and fright-
ened her.
The subjects and the main characters are now the same words:
Subject/characterVerb
Little Red Riding Hoodwas walking
the Wolfjumped
Principle of Clarity 2: Make Important Actions Verbs
Now look at how the actions and verbs differ in (2a): its actions 
are not expressed in verbs but in abstract nouns (actions are bold-
faced; verbs are capitalized):
 2a. Once upon a time, as a walk through the woods was taking place 
on the part of Little Red Riding Hood, the Wolf’s jump out from 
 behind a tree 
occurred, causing her fright.
Note how vague the verbs are: was taking, occurred. In (2b), the 
clearer sentence, the verbs name specific actions:
✓ 2b. Once upon a time, Little Red Riding Hood was walking through 
the woods, when the Wolf 
jumped out from behind a tree and fright-
ened her.
Here’s the point: In (2a), the sentence that seems wordy 
and indirect, the two main characters, Little Red Riding 
Hood and the Wolf, are not subjects, and their actions—walk, 
jump, and fright—are not verbs. In (2b), the more direct sen-
tence, those two main characters are subjects and their main 
actions are verbs. That’s why we prefer (2b).
Fairy tales and aCademiC or  
proFessional writing
Fairy tales may seem distant from writing in college or on the job. 
But they’re not, because most sentences are still about characters 
doing things. Compare these two:
 3a. The Federalists’ argument in regard to the destabilization of 
 government by popular democracy was based on their belief in the 

 Lesson 3 Actions 31
tendency of factions to further their self-interest at the expense of the 
common good.
✓ 3b. The Federalists argued that popular democracy destabilized gov-
ernment, because they believed that factions tended to further their 
self-interest at the expense of the common good.
We can analyze those sentences as we did the ones about Little 
Red Riding Hood.
Sentence (3a) feels dense for two reasons. First, its characters 
are not subjects. Its simple subject (underlined) is argument, but 
the characters (italicized) are Federalists, popular democracy, gov-
ernment, and factions:
 
3a. The Federalists’ argument in regard to the destabilization of 
 government by popular democracy was based on their belief in the ten-
dency of factions to further their self-interest at the expense of the 
common good.
Second, most of the actions (boldfaced) are not verbs (capital-
ized), but abstract nouns:
 3a. The Federalists’ argument in regard to the destabilization of 
government by popular democracy 
was based on their belief in the 
tendency of factions to 
Further their self-interest at the expense of 
the common good.
Notice how long and complex is the whole subject of (3a) and how 
little meaning is expressed by its main verb was based:
Whole SubjectVerb
The Federalists’ argument in regard to the  
destabilization of government by popular democracy
 
was based
Readers think (3b) is clearer for two reasons: the characters 
(italicized) are subjects (underlined), and the actions (boldfaced) 
are verbs (capitalized):
 3b. The Federalists argued that popular democracy  destabilized gov-
ernment, because they 
believed that factions tended to  further 
their self-interest at the expense of the common good.
Note as well that all those whole subjects are short, specific, and 
concrete:
Whole Subject/characterVerb/action
the Federalistsargued
popular democracydestabilized
theybelieved
factionstended to further

32 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
In the rest of this lesson, we look at actions and verbs; in the 
next, at characters and subjects.
Verbs and aCtions
Our principle is this: A sentence seems clear when its important 
 actions are in verbs.
Look at how sentences (4a) and (4b) express their actions. In 
(4a), actions (boldfaced) are not verbs (capitalized); they are nouns:
 
4a.  Our  lack  of  data  prevented evaluation  of  UN  actions  in  
 targeting funds to areas most in need of assistance.
In (4b), on the other hand, the actions are almost all verbs:
✓ 4b. Because we lacked data, we could not evaluate whether the UN 
had targeted funds to areas that most needed assistance.
Readers will think your writing is dense if you use lots of ab-
stract nouns, especially those derived from verbs and adjectives, 
nouns ending in -tion, -ment, -ence, and so on, especially when you 
make those abstract nouns the subjects of verbs.
A noun derived from a verb or adjective has a technical name: 
nominaLization. The word illustrates its meaning: When we nomi-
nalize nominalize, we create the nominalization nominalization. 
Here are a few examples:
Verb S  nominalizationadjectiVe S  nominalization
discover        S      discoverycareless     S    carelessness
resist       S      resistancedifferent   S    difference
react       S      reactionproficient S    proficiency
We can also nominalize a verb by adding -ing (making it a gerund):
She flies S her flyingWe sang S our singing
Some nominalizations and verbs are identical:
hope S hope result S  result repair S repair
We 
request that you review the data.
Our request 
is that you do a review of the data.
(Some actions also hide out in adjectives: It is applicable S it   
applies.  Some  others:  indicative,  dubious,  argumentative,  
deserving.)

 Lesson 3 Actions 33
No element of style more characterizes turgid writing, writing 
that feels abstract, indirect, and difficult, than lots of nominaliza-
tions, especially as the subjects of verbs.
Here’s the point: In grade school, we learned that subjects  
are characters (or “doers”) and that verbs are actions. That’s 
often true:
                    subject                    verb                    object
  We discussed the problem.
                    doer                    action                    
But it is not true for this almost synonymous sentence:
                   subject                   verb                                      
The    problem        was        the    topic        of    our    discussion.
            doer        action
We can move characters and actions around in a sentence, 
and subjects and verbs don’t have to name any particular 
kind of thing at all. But when you match characters to sub-
jects and actions to verbs in most of your sentences, readers 
are likely to think your prose is clear, direct, and readable.
Exercise 3.1
If you aren’t sure whether you can distinguish verbs, adjectives, 
and nominalizations, practice on the list below. Turn verbs and 
 adjectives into nominalizations, and nominalizations into adjec-
tives and verbs. Remember that some verbs and nominalizations 
have the same form:
 Poverty predictably causes social problems.
     Poverty     is a predictable cause of social problems.
analysisbelieveattemptconclusionevaluate
suggestapproachcomparisondefinediscuss
expressionfailureintelligentthoroughappearance
decreaseimproveincreaseaccuracycareful
emphasizeexplanationdescriptionclearexamine

34 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Exercise 3.2
Identify the subject, character, verb, and action in these pairs of 
sentences. The unclear sentence is first; the improved sentence fol-
lows. What do you notice about how characters and subjects, and 
actions and verbs, are aligned in each?
 1a. There is opposition among many voters to nuclear power 
plants based on a belief in their threat to human health.
 1b. Many voters oppose nuclear power plants because they believe 
that such plants threaten human health.
 2a.  There has been growth in the market for electronic books be-
cause of the frequent preference among customers for their 
convenience and portability.
 2b.  The market for electronic books has grown because customers 
frequently prefer their convenience and portability.
 3a. There is a belief among some researchers that consumers’ 
choices in fast food restaurants would be healthier if there 
were postings of nutrition information in their menus.
 3b. Some researchers believe that consumers would choose health-
ier foods if fast food companies posted nutrition information 
in their menus.
 4a. The design of the new roller coaster was more of a struggle for 
the engineers than had been their expectation.
 4b.  The engineers struggled more than they expected when de-
signing the new roller coaster.
 5a. Because the student’s preparation for the exam was thorough, 
none of the questions on it were a surprise.
 5b.  Because the student prepared thoroughly for the exam, she 
was not surprised by any of the questions on it.
Exercise 3.3
Create three sentences using verbs and adjectives from Exercise 3.1. 
Then rewrite them using the corresponding nominalizations (keep 
the meaning the same). For example, using suggest, discuss, and 
careful, write:
 I suggest that we discuss the issue carefully.
Then rewrite that sentence into its nominalized form:
 My suggestion is that our discussion of the issue be done with care.
Only when you see how a clear sentence can be made unclear will 
you understand why it seemed clear in the first place.

 Lesson 3 Actions 35
diagnosis and reVision: CHaraCters  
and aCtions
You can use the principles of verbs as actions and subjects as 
characters to explain why your readers judge your prose as they 
do. But more important, you can also use them to identify and 
revise sentences that seem clear to you but not to your readers. 
Revision is a three-step process: diagnose, analyze, rewrite.
  1.  Diagnose
a. Ignoring short (four- or five-word) introductory phrases, 
underline the first seven or eight words in each sentence.
 
The outsourcing of high-tech work to Asia by corporations 
means the loss of jobs for many American workers.
b. Then look for two results:
•	You  underlined  abstract  nouns  as  simple  subjects  
(boldfaced).
The outsourcing of high-tech work to Asia by corporations 
means the loss of jobs for many American workers.
•	You underlined seven or eight words before getting to a 
verb.
The outsourcing of high-tech work to Asia by corpora-
tions (10 words) means the loss of jobs for many American 
workers.
  2.  Analyze
a. Decide who your main characters are, particularly the flesh-
and-blood ones (more about this in the next lesson).
 
The outsourcing of high-tech work to Asia by corporations 
means the loss of jobs for many American workers.
b. Then look for the actions that those characters perform, 
especially actions in nominalizations, those abstract nouns 
derived from verbs.
 The outsourcing of high-tech work to Asia by corporations 
means the loss of jobs for many American workers.
  3. Rewrite
a. If the actions are nominalizations, make them verbs.
outsourcing S outsource loss S lose

36 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
b. Make the characters the subjects of those verbs.
corporations outsource American workers lose
c. Rewrite the sentence with subordinating conjunctions such 
as because, if, when, although, why, how, whether, or that.
✓ Many middle-class American workers are losing their jobs, be-
cause corporations are outsourcing their high-tech work to Asia.
some Common patterns
You  can  quickly  spot  and  revise  five  common  patterns  of  
nominalizations.
  1.  The nominalization is the subject of an empty verb such 
as be, seems, has, etc.:
 The intention of the committee is to audit the records.
a. Change the nominalization to a verb:
 intention S intend
b. Find a character that would be the subject of that verb:
 The intention of the committee is to audit the records.
c. Make that character the subject of the new verb:
✓ The committee intends to audit the records.
  2.  The nominalization follows an empty verb:
The agency conducted an investigation into the matter.
a. Change the nominalization to a verb:
 investigation S investigate
b. Replace the empty verb with the new verb:
 conducted S investigated
✓ The agency investigated the matter.
  3.  One nominalization is the subject of an empty verb and a 
second nominalization follows it:
 
Our loss in sales was a result of their expansion of outlets.
a. Revise the nominalizations into verbs:
 loss S lose expansion S expand

 Lesson 3 Actions 37
b. Identify the characters that would be the subjects of those 
verbs:
 Our loss in sales was a result of their expansion of outlets.
c. Make those characters subjects of those verbs:
 we lose they expand
d. Link the new cLauses with a logical connection:
•	To express simple cause: because, since, when
•	To express conditional cause: if, provided that, so long as
•	To contradict expected causes: though, although, unless
     Our     loss in sales S We lost sales
 was the result of S because
     their     expansion of outlets S they 
expanded outlets
  4.  A nominalization follows there is or there are:
There is no need for our further study of this problem.
a. Change the nominalization to a verb:
 need S need study S study
b. Identify the character that should be the subject of the verb:
 There is no need for our further study of this problem.
c. Make that character the subject of the verb:
 no need S we need not our study S we study
✓ We need not study this problem further.
  5. Two or three nominalizations in a row are joined by 
prepositions:
We did a review of the evolution of the brain.
a. Turn the first nominalization into a verb:
 review S review
b. Either leave the second nominalization as it is, or turn it 
into a verb in a clause beginning with how or why:
 
evolution of the brain S how the brain evolved
✓ First, we reviewed the evolution of the brain.
✓ First, we reviewed how the brain evoLved.

38 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
some Happy ConseqUenCes
When you consistently rely on verbs to express key actions, your 
readers benefit in many ways:
  1.  Your sentences are more concrete, because they will have 
 concrete subjects and verbs. Compare:
 There was an affirmative decision for expansion.
✓ The Director decided to expand the program.
  2.  Your sentences are more concise. When you use nominaliza-
tions, you have to add articles like a and the and prepositions 
such as of, by, and in. You don’t need them when you use verbs 
and conjunctions:
 A revision of  the  program  wiLL resuLt in increases in  our  
 efficiency in the servicing of clients.
✓ If we revise the program, we can serve clients more efficiently.
  3.  The logic of your sentences is clearer. When you nominalize 
verbs, you link actions with fuzzy prepositions and phrases 
such as of, by, and on the part of. But when you use verbs, you 
link clauses with precise subordinating conjunctions such as 
because, although, and if:
 Our more effective presentation of our study resulted in our 
 success, despite an earlier start by others.
✓ Although  others  started  earlier,  we  succeeded  because  we  
 presented our study more effectively.
  4.  Your sentence tells a more coherent story. Nominalizations let 
you distort the sequence of actions. (The numbers refer to the 
real sequence of events.)
 
Decisions
4
 in regard to administration
5
 of medication despite in-
ability
2
 of an irrational patient appearing
1
 in a Trauma Center to 
provide legal consent
3
 rest with the attending physician alone.
Quick Tip:    When you revise a complicated sentence, 
you will have more than one character-action clause.  Decide 
how the clauses fit together, then try out these patterns:  
X because Y; Since X, Y; If X, then Y; Although X, Y; X and/ 
but/so Y.

 Lesson 3 Actions 39
When we revise those actions into verbs and reorder them, 
you get a more coherent narrative:
✓ When a patient appears
1
 in a Trauma Center and behaves
2
  so  
 irrationally that he cannot legally consent
3
 to treatment, only the 
attending physician can decide
4
 whether to medicate
5
 him.
a Common problem solVed
You’ve probably had this experience: you think you’ve written some-
thing good, but your reader thinks otherwise. You wonder whether 
that person is just being difficult, but you bite your tongue and try 
to fix it, even though you think it should already be clear to anyone 
who can read Dr. Seuss. When that happens to me (regularly, I might 
add), I almost always realize—eventually—that my readers are right, 
that they see where my writing needs work better than I do.
Why are we so often right about the writing of others and so 
often wrong about our own? It is because we all read into our own 
writing what we want readers to get out of it. That explains why 
two readers can disagree about the clarity of the same piece of 
writing: the reader who is most familiar with its content will likely 
find it clearest. Both are right. Clarity is in the eye of more or less 
informed beholders.
That is why we need to look at our own writing in a way that is 
almost mechanical, that sidesteps our too-good understanding of it. 
The quickest way is to underline the first seven or eight words of ev-
ery sentence. If you don’t see in those words a character as a subject 
and a verb as a specific action, you have a candidate for revision.
Quick Tip:   When you revise a longer piece of work, 
look first at those passages that were hard to write because 
you didn’t fully understand your ideas. We all tend to write 
badly when we’re unsure about what we want to say or how 
to say it.
Exercise 3.4
One sentence in each of these pairs is clear, expressing characters 
as subjects and actions as verbs; the other is less clear, with ac-
tions in nominalizations and characters often not in subjects. First, 
identify which is which. Then circle nominalizations, bracket verbs,  

40 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
and underline subjects. Then put a “c” over characters that seem to 
perform actions.
 1a.  Some people argue that atmospheric carbon dioxide does not 
elevate global temperature.
 1b.  There has been speculation by educators about the role of the 
family in improving educational achievement.
 2a. The store’s price increases led to frustration among its customers.
 2b. When we write concisely, readers understand easily.
 3a.  Researchers have identified the Aids virus but have failed to 
 develop a vaccine to immunize those at risk.
 3b.  Attempts by economists at defining full employment have 
been met with failure.
 4a. Complaints by editorial writers about voter apathy rarely offer 
suggestions about dispelling it.
 4b.  Although critics claim that children who watch a lot of tele-
vision tend to become less able readers, no one has demon-
strated that to be true.
 5a.  The loss of market share to Japan by domestic automakers 
 resulted in the disappearance of hundreds of thousands of jobs.
 5b.  When educators embrace new-media technology, our schools 
will teach complex subjects more effectively.
 6a. We need to know which parts of our national forests are being 
logged most extensively so that we can save virgin stands at 
greatest risk.
 6b. There is a need for an analysis of library use to provide a 
 reliable base for the projection of needed resources.
 7a.  Many professional athletes fail to realize that they are unpre-
pared for life after stardom because their teams protect them 
from the problems that the rest of us face every day.
  7b.  Colleges  now  have  an  understanding  that  yearly  tuition  
 increases are impossible because of strong parental resistance 
to the soaring cost of higher education.
Exercise 3.5
Now revise the nominalized sentences in Exercise 3.4 into sentences 
in which the actions are verbs. Use its paired verbal version as a 
model. For example, if the verbal sentence begins with when, be-
gin your revision with when:
Sentence to 
revise:
2a.  The store’s price increases led to frustration among  
its customers.
Model:2b. When we write concisely, readers understAnd more easily.
Your revision:2a. When the store increAsed prices, . . .

 Lesson 3 Actions 41
Exercise 3.6
Revise these next sentences so that the nominalizations are verbs 
and characters are their subjects. In (1) through (5), characters are 
italicized and nominalizations are boldfaced.
 1. Lincoln’s hope was for the preservation of the Union with-
out war, but the South’s attack on Fort Sumter made war an 
inevitability.
 2. Attempts were made on the part of the president’s aides to 
 assert his immunity from a congressional subpoena.
 3. There were predictions by business executives that the economy 
would experience a quick revival.
 4. Your analysis of my report omits any data in support of your 
 criticism of my findings.
 5. The health care industry’s inability to exert cost controls could 
lead to the public’s decision that congressional action is needed.
In sentences 6 through 10, the characters are italicized; find the 
 actions and revise.
 6. A papal appeal was made to the world’s rich nations for assis-
tance to those facing the threat of African starvation.
 7. Attempts at explaining increases in voter participation in this 
year’s elections were made by several candidates.
 8. The agreement by the class on the reading list was based on the 
assumption that there would be tests on only certain selections.
 9. There was no independent business-sector study of the cause of 
the sudden increase in the trade surplus.
 10. An understanding as to the need for controls over drinking on 
campus was recognized by fraternities.
Exercise 3.7
Revise these sentences. At the end of each is a hint. For example:
     Congress’s     reduction of the deficit resulted in the decline of interest 
rates. [because]
✓ Interest rates declined because Congress reduced the deficit.
 1. The use of models in teaching prose style does not result in 
improvements of clarity and directness in student writing. 
 [Although we use . . .]
 2. Precision  in  plotting  the  location  of  building  foundations  
 enhances the possibility of its accurate reconstruction. [When we 
precisely plot . . .]

42 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
 3. Any departures by the members from established procedures may 
cause termination of membership by the Board. [If members . . .]
 4. A student’s lack of socialization into a field may lead to writing 
problems because of his insufficient understanding about argu-
ments by professionals in that field. [When . . ., . . ., because . . .]
 5. The successful implementation of a new curriculum depends on 
the cooperation of faculty with students in setting achievable 
goals within a reasonable time. [To implement . . ., . . .]
a qUaliFiCation: UseFUl nominalizations
I have so relentlessly urged you to turn nominalizations into verbs 
that you might think you should never use one. But in fact, you 
can’t write well without them. The trick is to know which to keep 
and which to revise. Keep these:
  1.  A nominalization that is a short subject that refers to a 
previous sentence:
✓ These arguments all depend on a single unproven claim.
✓ This decision can lead to positive outcomes.
          Those nominalizations link one sentence to another in a cohe-
sive flow, an issue I’ll discuss in more detail in Lesson 5.
  2.  A short nominalization that replaces an awkward The fact 
that:
 The fact that she admitted guilt impressed me.
✓ Her admission of guilt impressed me.
          But then, why not this:
✓ She impressed me when she admitted her guilt.
  3.  A nominalization that names what would be the object of 
the verb:
 I accepted what she requested [that is, She requested something].
✓ I accepted her request.
          This kind of nominalization feels more concrete than an 
 abstract one. However, contrast request above with this next 
sentence, where request is more of an action:
 Her request for assistance came after the deadline.
✓ She requested assistance after the deadline.

 Lesson 3 Actions 43
  4.  A nominalization that refers to a concept so familiar to 
your readers that to them, it is a virtual character (more 
about this in the next lesson):
✓ Few problems have so divided us as abortion on demand.
✓ The Equal Rights Amendment was an issue in past elections.
✓ Taxation without representation did not spark the American 
Revolution.
          Those nominalizations name familiar concepts: abortion on 
demand, amendment, election, taxation, representation, revolu-
tion. You must develop an eye for distinguishing nominaliza-
tions expressing common ideas from those you can revise into 
verbs:
 There is a demand for a repeal of the inheritance tax.
✓ We demand that Congress repeal the inheritance tax.
Clarity, not simplemindedness
Your readers want you to write clearly, but not in Dick-and-Jane 
sentences. Some argue that all sentences should be short, no 
more than fifteen or twenty words. But many mature ideas are 
too  complicated to express so compactly. In Lessons 10 and 11 
we look at ways to revise too-short, too-simple sentences into a 
style that is readable but still complex enough to communicate 
 complex  ideas.
in yoUr own words
Exercise 3.8
Go through a page of your own writing. Underline whole  subjects 
and bracket verbs. Now, think about the story you are telling.  Circle 
the main characters and box their actions, wherever they  appear. 
Look especially for actions hidden in nominalizations. What do you 
notice? How clear will a reader likely find your writing? If neces-
sary, revise to align characters with subjects and specific actions 
with verbs.

44 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
sUmming Up
The two most general principles for clear sentences are these: 
make main characters the subjects of your verbs; make those 
characters’ important actions your verbs.
We can represent these principles graphically. Readers must 
mentally integrate two levels of sentence structure. One, the gram-
matical level, is the relatively fixed sequence of subject and verb 
(the empty box is for everything that follows the verb):
FixedSubjectVerb
The other, the story level, is based on characters and their 
 actions and has no fixed order. Readers prefer these levels to 
match, for characters to be subjects and their actions to be verbs. 
We can graphically combine those principles:
FixedSubjectVerb
VariableCharacterAction
Keep in mind that readers want to see characters not just in a 
subject, as in these two:
The president’s veto of the bill infuriated Congress.
The veto of the bill by the president infuriated Congress.
Instead, they want to see the character as the subject, like this:
✓ When the president
subject
 vetoed
verb
 the bill, he
subject
 inFuriated
verb
 
Congress.
Exercise 3.9
Writers tend to think their writing is clearer than their readers do. 
Select a page of your writing and share it with a reader. Both of 
you rate its clarity on a scale of 1–10, with 10 being perfectly clear 
and 1 being incomprehensible. Use the procedures for diagnosing 
and analyzing sentences on page 35–36 to explain any difference 
in your rating. Revise your writing if necessary.

 Lesson 3 Actions 45
When you frustrate those expectations, you make readers work 
harder than necessary. So keep these principles in mind as you 
revise:
  1. Express actions in verbs:
 The intention of the committee is improvement of morale.
✓ The committee intends to improve morale.
  2.   Make the subjects of those verbs the characters associated 
with those actions:
 A decision by the dean in regard to the funding of the program by 
the department is necessary for adequate staff preparation.
✓ The staff can prepare adequately, only after the dean decides 
whether the department 
wiLL Fund the program.
  3. Don’t revise nominalizations when:
a. they refer to a previous sentence:
✓ These arguments all depend on a single unproven claim.
b. they replace an awkward The fact that:
 The fact that she strenuously objected impressed me.
✓ Her strenuous objections impressed me.
c. they name what would be the object of a verb:
 I do not know what she intends.
✓ I do not know her intentions.
d. they name a concept so familiar to your readers that it is a 
virtual character:
✓ Few problems have so divided us as abortion on demand.
✓ The Equal Rights Amendment was an issue in past elections.

46
Lesson 
4
Characters
Whatever is translatable in other and simpler words of the same 
language, without loss of sense or dignity, is bad.
—Samuel Taylor Coleridge
When character is lost, all is lost.
—anonymouS
Understanding the importance of 
c
haracters
Readers think sentences are clear and direct when they see key 
 actions in their verbs. Compare (1a) with (1b):
 1a. The CIA feared the president would recommend to  Congress that 
it reduce its budget.
 1b. The CIA had fears that the president would send a recommenda-
tion to Congress that it make a reduction in its budget.
Most readers think (1a) is clearer than (1b), but not much. 
Now compare (1b) and (1c):
 1b. The CIA had fears that the president would send a recommenda-
tion to Congress that it make a reduction in its budget.
 1c. The fear of the CIA was that a recommendation from the presi-
dent to Congress would be for a reduction in its budget.

 Lesson 4 Characters 47
Most readers think that (1c) is much less clear than either (1a) 
or (1b).
The reason is this: In both (1a) and (1b), important characters 
(italicized) are short, specific subjects (underlined) of verbs:
     1a.     The CIA feared the president would reCommend to  Congress that it 
reduCe its budget.
     1b.     The CIA 
had fears that the president would Send a     recommendation 
to Congress that it 
make a reduction in its budget.
But in (1c) the two subjects (underlined) are not concrete 
characters but abstractions (boldfaced):
 1c. The fear of the CIA waS that a recommendation from the president 
to Congress 
would be for a reduction in its budget.
The different verbs in (1a) and (1b) make some difference, but the 
abstract subjects in (1c) make a bigger one. Even worse, charac-
ters can be deleted entirely, like this:
     1d.     There waS fear  that  there would be  a  recommendation  
for a budget reduction.
Who fears? Who recommends? The sentence’s context may help 
readers guess correctly, but if the context is ambiguous, you risk 
them guessing wrongly.
Here’s the point: Readers want actions in verbs, but  
they want characters as subjects even more. We create 
a problem for readers when for no good reason we do not 
name characters in subjects or, worse, delete them entirely. 
It is important to express actions in verbs, but the first prin-
ciple of a clear style is this: Make the subjects of most of your 
verbs the main characters in your story.
diagnosis and revision: characters
To get characters into subjects, you have to know three things:
  1.  when your subjects are not characters
  2.  if they aren’t, where you should look for characters

48 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
  3. what you should do when you find them (or don’t)
For example, this sentence feels indirect and impersonal:
 Governmental intervention in fast-changing technologies has 
led to the distortion of market evolution and interference in new 
product development.
We can diagnose that sentence:
  1.  Underline the first seven or eight words:
 Governmental intervention in fast-changing technologies has led  
to the distortion of market evolution and interference in new 
product development.
   In those first words, readers want to see characters not just 
in the whole subjects of verbs, as government is implied in 
governmental, but as their simple subjects. In that example, 
 however, they aren’t.
  2.  Find the main characters. They may be poSSeSSive pronounS 
attached  to  nominalizations,  objects  of  prepositions  
(particularly by and of), or only implied. In that sentence, 
one main character is in the adjective governmental; the 
other, market, is in the object of a preposition: of market 
evolution.
  3. Skim the passage for actions involving those characters, 
particularly actions buried in nominalizations. Ask Who is 
doing what?
governmental interventionS ✓government intervenes
distortionS ✓[government] distorts
market evolutionS ✓markets evolve
interferenceS ✓[government] interferes
developmentS ✓[market] develops
 To revise, reassemble those new subjects and verbs into a 
 sentence, using conjunctions such as if, although, because, 
when, how, and why:
✓ When a government intervenes in fast-changing technologies, it 
distorts how markets evolve and interferes with their ability to 
develop new products.

 Lesson 4 Characters 49
 Be aware that just as actions can be in adjectives (reliable S rely),  
so can characters:
 Medieval theological debates often addressed issues considered 
trivial by modern philosophical thought.
 When you find a character implied in an adjective, revise in the  
same way:
✓ 
Medieval theologians often debated issues that modern philoso-
phers consider trivial.
Quick Tip:    The first step in diagnosing a dense style is 
to look at subjects. If you do not see main characters there 
expressed in a few short, concrete words, you have to look 
for them. They can be in objects of prepositions, in posses-
sive pronouns, or in adjectives. Once you find them, look for 
actions they are involved in.
When you are revising your writing:
Make those characters the subjects of verbs naming those 
 actions. Then string together those character-action pairs 
into complete sentences.
When you are reading:
Focusing on the characters, try to retell the story in the sen-
tences, one action at a time. If that fails, list character-action 
pairs and rewrite the sentences yourself.
reconstrUcting absent characters
Readers have the biggest problem with sentences devoid of all 
characters:
A decision was made in favor of doing a study of the disagreements.
That sentence could mean either of these, and more:
We decided that I should study why they disagreed.
I decided that you should study why he disagreed.
The writer may know who is doing what, but readers might not 
and so usually need help.

50 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Sometimes we omit characters to make a general statement:
Research strategies that look for more than one variable are of more 
use in understanding factors in psychiatric disorder than  strategies 
based on the assumption that the presence of psychopathology 
is  dependent on a single gene or on strategies in which only one 
 biological variable is studied.
But when we try to revise that into something clearer, we have to 
invent characters, then decide what to call them. Do we use one or 
we, or name a generic “doer”?
✓ If one/we/researchers are to understand what causes psychiatric 
disorder, one/we/they should use research strategies that look for 
more than one variable rather than assume that a single gene is 
 responsible for a psychopathology or adopt a strategy in which 
one/we/they study only one biological variable.
To most of us, one feels stiff, but we may be ambiguous because 
it can refer just to the writer, or to the writer and others but not 
the reader, or to the reader and writer but not others, or to every-
one. And if you are not directly naming your reader, you is usually 
inappropriate.
But if you avoid both nominalizations and vague pronouns, 
you can slide into paSSive verbs (I’ll discuss them in a moment):
To understand what makes patients vulnerable to psychiatric dis-
orders, strategies that look for more than one variable 
should be 
used rather than strategies in which a gene is assumed a gene causes 
 psychopathology or only one biological variable 
is studied.
Quick Tip:   When you are explaining a complicated 
 issue to someone involved in it, imagine sitting across the 
table from that person, saying you as often as you can:
 Taxable intangible property includes financial notes and 
municipal bonds. A one-time tax of 2% on its value applies 
to this property.
✓ You have to pay tax on your intangible property, including 
your financial notes and municipal bonds. On this prop-
erty, you pay a one-time tax of 2%.
If you seems not appropriate, change it to a character that is:
 Taxpayers have to pay tax on their intangible property, 
 including their  financial  notes  and  municipal  bonds.   
They pay . . .

 Lesson 4 Characters 51
Abstractions as Characters
So far, I’ve discussed characters as if they must be flesh- and-blood 
people. But you can tell stories whose main characters are ab-
stractions, including nominalizations, so long as you make them 
the subjects of a series of sentences that tell a story. We might 
have solved the problem of the previous example with a  different 
kind of character, the abstraction study:
✓ 
To understand what causes psychiatric disorder, studies should 
look for more than one variable rather than adopt a strategy in 
which they test only one biological variable or assume that a single 
gene is responsible for a psychopathology.
The term studies names a virtual character because we are so 
 familiar with it and because it is the subject of a series of actions: 
understand, should look, adopt, test, and assume.
But when you do use abstractions as characters, you can cre-
ate a problem. A story about an abstraction as familiar as studies 
is clear enough, but if you surround a less familiar abstract char-
acter with a lot of other abstractions, readers may feel that your 
writing is unnecessarily dense and complex.
For example, few of us are familiar with the terms prospective 
and immediate intention, so most of us are likely to struggle with a 
story about them, especially when they are surrounded by other ab-
stractions (actions are boldfaced; human characters are italicized):
The argument is this. The cognitive component of intention exhibits 
a high degree of complexity. Intention is temporally divisible into 
two: prospective intention and immediate intention. The cognitive 
function of prospective intention is the representation of a subject’s 
similar past actions, his current situation, and his course of future 
actions. That is, the cognitive component of prospective intention  
is a plan. The cognitive function of immediate intention is the 
 monitoring and guidance of ongoing bodily movement.
—Myles Brand, Intending and Acting
We can make that passage clearer if we tell it from the point 
of view of flesh-and-blood characters (italicized; actions are bold-
faced; verbs are capitalized):
✓ I argue this about intention. It haS a complex cognitive compo-
nent of two temporal kinds: prospective and immediate. We 
use 
prospective intention to 
represent how we have acted in our 
past and present and how we 
will act in the future. That is, we 
use the cognitive component of prospective intention to help 
us 
plan. We use immediate intention to monitor and guide our 
 bodies  as we 
move them.

52 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
But have I made this passage say something that the writer 
didn’t mean? Some argue that any change in form changes mean-
ing. In this case, the writer might offer an opinion, but only his 
readers could decide whether the two passages have different 
meanings, because at the end of the day, a passage means only 
what careful and competent readers think it does.
Exercise 4.1
Diagnose and revise these next sentences. Look at the first six or 
seven words (ignore short introductory phrases). Then revise so 
that each has a specific character as subject of a specific verb. To 
revise, you may have to invent characters. Use we, I, or any other 
word that seems appropriate.
 1. Contradictions among the data require an explanation. [we]
 2. Having their research taken seriously by professionals in the field 
was hard work for the students. [student researchers]
 3. In recent years, the appearance of new interpretations about the 
meaning of the discovery of America has led to a reassessment of 
Columbus’s place in Western history. [historians]
 4. Resistance has been growing against building mental health 
 facilities in residential areas because of a belief that the few 
 examples of improper management are typical. [residents]
Here’s the point: Most readers want the subjects of verbs 
to name flesh-and-blood characters. But often, you must 
write about abstractions. When you do, turn them into vir-
tual characters by making them the subjects of verbs that 
tell a story. If readers are familiar with your abstractions, 
no problem. But when they are not, avoid using lots of other 
abstract nominalizations around them. When you revise an 
abstract passage, you may have a problem if the hidden char-
acters are “people in general.” Try a general term for who-
ever is doing the action, such as researchers, social critics, 
one, and so on. If not, try we. But the fact is, unlike many 
other languages, English has no good solution for naming a 
generic “doer.”

 Lesson 4 Characters 53
characters and passive verbs
More than any other advice, you probably remember Write in the active 
voice, not in the passive. That’s not bad advice, but it has exceptions.
When you write in the aCTive voice, you typically put
• the agenT or source of an action in the subject
•	the goal or receiver of an action in a direCT objeCT:
subjectverbobject
Active:Ilostthe money
character/agentactiongoal
A verb is in the passive voice when its paST parTiCiple is preceded 
by a form of be (as it is here). The passive differs from the active 
in two ways:
  1.  The subject names the goal of the action.
  2. The agent or source of the action is after the verb in a by-
phrase or dropped entirely:
subjectbe + verbprepositional phrase
Passive:The moneywas lost[by me].
goalactioncharacter/agent
 5. A decision about forcibly administering medication in an emer-
gency room setting despite the inability of an irrational patient 
to provide legal consent is usually an on-scene medical decision. 
[medical professionals]
 6. The performance of the play was marked by enthusiasm, but 
there was a lack of intelligent staging.
 7. Despite the critical panning of the latest installment of the series, 
the love of the loyal fans was not affected.
 8. Tracing transitions in a well-written article provides help in ef-
forts at improving coherence in writing.
 9. The rejection of the proposal was a disappointment but not a 
surprise because our expectation was that a political decision 
had been made.
 10. With the decline in network television viewing in favor of online 
streaming video, awareness is growing at the networks of a need 
to revise programming.

54 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
The  terms  active  and  passive,  however,  are  ambiguous,  
 because they can refer not only to those two grammatical con-
structions but also to how a sentence makes you feel. We call a 
sentence  passive if it feels flat, regardless of whether its verb is 
grammatically in the passive voice. For example, compare these 
two sentences.
We can manage the problem if we control costs.
Problem management requires cost control.
Grammatically, both sentences are in the active voice, but the sec-
ond feels passive, for three reasons:
• Neither of its actions—management and control—are verbs; 
both are nominalizations.
•	The subject is problem management, an abstraction.
•	The sentence lacks flesh-and-blood characters.
To understand why we respond to those two sentences as we 
do, we have to distinguish the technical, grammatical meanings of 
active and passive from their figurative, impressionistic meanings. 
In what follows, I discuss grammatical passives.
Choosing Between Active and Passive
Some critics tell us to avoid the passive everywhere because it adds 
words and often deletes the agent, the “doer” of the action. But the 
passive is often the better choice. To choose between  active and 
passive, you have to answer three questions:
  1.  Must your readers know who is responsible for the  action? 
Often, we don’t say who does an action because we don’t know 
or readers won’t care. For example, we naturally choose the 
passive in these sentences:
✓ The president was rumored to have considered resigning.
✓ Those who are found guilty can be fined.
✓ Valuable records should always be kept in a safe.
          If we do not know who spreads rumors, we cannot say, and 
no one doubts who finds people guilty or fines them or who 
should keep records safe. So those passives are the right 
choice.
              Sometimes, of course, writers use the passive when they 
don’t want readers to know who is responsible for an action, 
especially when the doer is the writer. For example,

 Lesson 4 Characters 55
 Because the test was not completed, the flaw was uncorrected.
I will discuss the issue of intended impersonality in Lesson 12.
  2.  Would the active or passive verb help your readers move 
more smoothly from one sentence to the next? We depend 
on the beginning of a sentence to give us a context of what 
we know before we read what’s new. A sentence confuses us 
when it opens with information that is new and unexpected. 
For  example, in this next passage, the subject of the second 
sentence gives us new and complex information (boldfaced), 
before we read more familiar information that we recall from 
the previous sentence (italicized):
 We must decide whether to improve education in the  sciences 
alone or to raise the level of education across the whole  curriculum.  
The weight given to industrial competitiveness as  opposed 
to the value we attach to the liberal arts 
new information
 will 
 
deTermine 
active verb
 our decision. 
familiar information
          In the second sentence, the verb determine is in the active 
voice. But we could read the sentence more easily if it were 
passive, because the passive would put the short, familiar in-
formation (our decision) first and the newer, more complex 
information last, the order we prefer:
✓ We must decide whether to improve education in the sciences 
alone or raise the level of education across the whole curriculum. 
Our decision
familiar information
 will be deTermined
passive verb
 by the 
weight we give to industrial competiveness as opposed to the 
value we attach to the liberal arts. 
new information
          I discuss where to put old and new information more exten-
sively in Lesson 5.
  3. Would the active or passive give readers a more  consistent 
and appropriate point of view? The writer of this next 
 passage reports the end of World War II in Europe from the 
point of view of the Allies. To do so, she uses active verbs to 
make the Allies a consistent sequence of subjects:
✓ By early 1945, the Allies had essentially defeaTed 
active
 Germany; 
all that remained was a bloody climax. American, French, British,  
and Russian forces 
had breaChed 
active
 its borders and were 
 
bombing 
active
  it  around  the  clock.  But  they had  not  yet  so   
devaSTaTed 
active
 Germany as to destroy its ability to resist.
          Had she wanted to explain history from the German point of 
view, she would have used passive verbs to make Germany the 
subject/character:

56 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
✓ By early 1945, Germany had essentially been defeaTed; 
passive
  
all that remained was a bloody climax. Its borders 
had been  
breaChed, 
passive
 and it waS being bombed 
passive
 around the clock. 
It 
had not been so devaSTaTed, 
passive
 however, that it could not 
 
reSiST. 
active
Some writers switch from one character to another for no 
 apparent reason. Avoid this:
 By early 1945, the Allies had essentially defeated Germany. Its 
borders had been breached, and they were bombing it around the 
clock. Germany was not so devastated, however, that the Allies 
would meet with no resistance. Though Germany’s population was 
demoralized, the Allies still attacked German cities from the air.
Pick a point of view and stick to it.
Exercise 4.2
In the following, change all active verbs into passives, and all 
 passives into actives. Which sentences improve? Which do not? (In 
the first two, active verbs that could be passive are italicized; verbs 
already passive are boldfaced.)
 1. Independence is gained by those on welfare when skills are 
learned that the marketplace values.
 2. Different planes of the painting are noticed, because their colors 
are set against a background of shades of gray that are laid on in 
layers that cannot be seen unless the surface is examined closely.
Here’s the point: Many writers use the passive too often, 
but it has important uses. Use it in these contexts:
•	You don’t know who did an action, readers don’t care, or 
you don’t want them to know.
•	You want to shift a long and complex bundle of informa-
tion to the end of a sentence, especially when doing so also 
lets you begin with a chunk of information that is shorter, 
more familiar, and therefore easier to understand.
•	You want to focus your readers’ attention on one or 
 another  character.

 Lesson 4 Characters 57
The “Objective” Passive vs. I/We
Some scholarly writers claim that they should not use a first- 
person subject, because they must create an objective point of 
view, something like this:
Based on the writers’ verbal intelligence, prior knowledge, and essay 
scores, their essays were analyzed for structure and evaluated for 
richness of concepts. The subjects were then divided into a high- or 
low-ability group. Half of each group was randomly assigned to a 
treatment group or to a placebo group.
Contrary to that claim, academic and scientific writers use the 
active voice and the first-person I and we regularly. These next 
passages come from articles in respected journals:
✓ This paper is concerned with two problems. How can we best 
 handle in a transformational grammar certain restrictions that . . .,  
To illustrate, we may cite . . ., we shall show . . .
✓ Since the pituitary-adrenal axis is activated during the acute phase 
response, we have investigated the potential role . . . Specifically, 
we have studied the effects of interleukin-1 . . .
Here are the first few words from several consecutive sen-
tences from Science, a journal of great prestige:
✓ We examine . . ., We compare . . ., We have used . . ., Each has  
been weighted . . ., We merely take . . ., They are subject . . ., We  
use . . ., Efron and Morris describe . . ., We observed . . ., We might 
find . . .
—John P. Gilbert, Bucknam McPeek, and Frederick Mosteller,  
“Statistics and Ethics in Surgery and Anesthesia,” Science
It is not true that academic writers always avoid the first person  
I or we.
 3. 
In this article, it is argued that the Vietnam War was fought to 
extend influence in Southeast Asia and was not ended until it 
was made clear that the United States could not defeat North 
Vietnam unless atomic weapons were used.
 4. Science education will not be improved in this nation to a level 
sufficient to ensure that American industry will be supplied with 
skilled workers and researchers until more money is provided to 
primary and secondary schools.

58 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Passives, Characters, and Metadiscourse
When academic writers do use the first person, however, they use 
it in certain ways. Look at the verbs in the passages above. They 
fall into two groups:
• Some refer to research activities: examine, observe, measure, 
record, use. Those verbs are usually in the passive voice: The 
subjects were observed . . .
•	Others refer not to the subject matter or the research, but 
to the writer’s own writing and thinking: cite, show, inquire. 
These verbs are often active and in the first person: We will 
show . . . They are examples of what is called 
meTadiSCourSe.
Metadiscourse is language that refers not to the substance of 
your ideas, but to yourself, your reader, or your writing:
• your thinking and act of writing: We/I will explain, show,  argue, 
claim, deny, suggest, contrast, add, expand, summarize . . .
•	your readers’ actions: consider now, as you recall, look at the 
next example . . .
•	the logic and form of what you have written: first, second; to 
begin; therefore, however, consequently . . .
Metadiscourse appears most often in introductions, where 
writers announce their intentions: I claim that . . ., I will show . . .,  
We begin by . . ., and again at the end, when they summarize: I 
have argued . . ., I have shown . . . What distinguishes those actions 
is that only the writer can lay claim to them.
On the other hand, scholarly writers generally do not use the 
first person to describe specific actions they performed as part of 
their research, actions that anyone can perform:  measure,  record, 
examine, observe, use. Those verbs are usually in the passive voice: 
The subjects were observed . . . . We rarely find passages like this:
To  determine  if  monokines  elicited  an  adrenal  steroidogenic  
 response, I 
added preparations of . . .
Most writers would use a passive verb, were added, to name an 
 
action that anyone, not just the writer, can perform:
To determine if monokines elicited a response, preparations . . . 
were added.
A passive sentence like that, however, can create a problem: 
its writer dangled a modifier. You dangle a modifier when an 
 introductory phrase has an implied subject that differs from the 

 Lesson 4 Characters 59
explicit subject in the following or preceding clause. In that ex-
ample, the implied subject of the infiniTive verb determine is I or 
we: I determine or we determine.
[So  that  I  could]  determine  if  monokines  elicited  a  response,  
 preparations 
were added.
But that implied subject, I, differs from the explicit subject of the 
clause it introduces—preparations were added. When the two dif-
fer, the modifier dangles. Writers of scientific prose use this pat-
tern so often, though, that it has become standard usage in their 
community.
I might note that this impersonal “scientific” style is a mod-
ern development. In his “New Theory of Light and Colors” (1672), 
Sir Isaac Newton wrote this charming first-person account of an 
experiment:
I procured a triangular glass prism, to try therewith the celebrated 
phenomena of colors. And for that purpose, having darkened my lab-
oratory, and made a small hole in my window shade, to let in a con-
venient quantity of the sun’s light, I placed my prism at the entrance, 
that the light might be thereby refracted to the opposite wall. It was 
at first a very pleasing diversion to view the vivid and intense colors 
produced thereby.
Quick  Tip:    Some  teachers  prohibit  the  use  of  I 
 everywhere in the writing of their students not because it is 
wrong, but because inexperienced writers begin too many 
sentences with I think . . ., I believe . . ., and so on. Others for-
bid I because they want to discourage students from writing 
a narrative account of their thinking: First I read . . ., Then  
I considered . . . On those two occasions, follow their advice.
Here’s the point: Some writers and editors avoid the first 
person by using the passive everywhere, but deleting an I or 
we doesn’t make a researcher’s thinking more objective. We 
know that behind those impersonal sentences are still flesh-
and-blood people doing, thinking, and writing. In fact, the 
first-person I and we are common in scholarly prose when 
used with verbs that name actions unique to the writer.

60 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Exercise 4.3
The verbs in 1 through 4 below are passive, but two could be 
 active because they are metadiscourse verbs that would take first-
person subjects. Revise the passive verbs that should be changed 
into  active verbs. Then go through each sentence again and revise 
nominalizations into verbs as needed.
 1. It is believed that a lack of understanding about the risks of 
alcohol is a cause of student bingeing.
 2. The model has been subjected to extensive statistical analysis.
 3. Success in exporting more crude oil for hard currency is sug-
gested here as the cause of the improvement of the Russian 
economy.
 4. The creation of a database is being considered, but no estimate 
has been made in regard to the potential of its usefulness.
The verbs in 5 through 8 are active, but some of them should be 
passive because they are not metadiscourse verbs. Revise the active 
verbs that should be changed into passive verbs, and revise in other 
ways as needed.
 5. In Section IV, I argue that the indigenous peoples engaged in 
overcultivation of the land, leading to its exhaustion as a food-
producing area.
 6. Our  intention  in  this  book  is  to  help  readers  achieve  an  
 understanding not only of the differences in grammar between 
Arabic and English but also the differences in worldview as re-
flected by Arabic vocabulary.
 7. To make an evaluation of changes in the flow rate, I made a 
comparison of the current rate with the original rate on the basis 
of figures I had compiled with figures that Jordan had collected.
 
8. We performed the tissue rejection study on the basis of methods 
developed with our discovery of increases in dermal sloughing as 
a result of cellular regeneration.
Exercise 4.4
In these sentences, change passive verbs into actives and active 
verbs into passives only where you think it will improve the sen-
tence. Invent characters where necessary. (Different answers are 
correct for this one.)
 1. The author’s impassioned narrative style is abandoned and a 
cautious treatment of theories of conspiracy is presented. But 
when the narrative line is picked up again, he invests his prose 
with the same vigor and force.

 Lesson 4 Characters 61
 2. These directives are written in a style of maximum simplicity as a 
result of an attempt at more effective communication with em-
ployees with limited reading skills.
 3. The ability of the human brain to arrive at solutions to human 
problems has been undervalued because studies have not been 
done that would be considered to have scientific reliability.
 4. Many arguments were advanced against Darwinian evolution in 
the nineteenth century because basic assumptions about our 
place in the world were challenged by it. No longer were hu-
mans defined as privileged creatures but rather as a product of 
natural forces.
Exercise 4.5
The excerpt below is from an actual letter from the chancellor of 
a state university to parents of students. Except for the second 
word, you, why is the first part so impersonal? Why is the last part 
more personal? Change the first part so that you name in subjects 
whoever performs an action. Then change the second part to elimi-
nate all characters. How do the two parts now differ? Have you 
improved the letter? This exercise raises the question of deliberate 
misdirection, an issue we’ll cover in Lesson 12.
 As you probably have heard, the U of X campus has been the 
scene of a number of incidents of racial and sexual harassment 
over the last several weeks. The fact that similar incidents have 
occurred on campuses around the country does not make them 
any less offensive when they take place here. Of the ten to 
twelve incidents that have been reported since early October, 
most have involved graffiti or spoken insults. In only two cases 
was any physical contact made, and in neither case was anyone 
injured.
 U of X is committed to providing its students with an environ-
ment where they can live, work, and study without fear of be-
ing taunted or harassed because of their race, gender, religion, 
or ethnicity. I have made it clear that bigotry and intolerance 
will not be permitted and that the U of X’s commitment to 
diversity is unequivocal. We are also taking steps to improve 
security in campus housing. We at the U of X are proud of this 
university’s tradition of diversity . . .

62 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Noun + Noun + Noun
One more stylistic choice does not directly involve characters and 
actions, but I discuss it here because it can distort the match that 
readers expect between the form of an idea and the grammar of its 
expression. It is the long Compound noun phrase:
Early childhood thought disorder misdiagnosis often results from 
 unfamiliarity with recent research literature describing such conditions.  
This paper is a review of seven recent studies in which are findings 
of particular relevance to pre-adolescent hyperactivity diagnosis and to 
treatment modalities involving medication maintenance level evalua-
tion procedures.
It is fine to modify one noun with another, as common phrases 
such as stone wall, student center, space shuttle, and many others 
show.
But strings of nouns feel lumpy, so avoid them, especially 
ones you invent. Revise compound nouns of your own invention; 
 revise, especially when they include nominalizations. Just reverse 
the order of words and find prepositions to connect them:
12345
earlychildhoodthoughtdisordermisdiagnosis
misdiagnosedisorderedthoughtin earlychildhood
54312
Re-assembled, it looks like this:
Physicians misdiagnose
5
 disordered
4
 thought
3
 in young
1
 children
2
 
because they are unfamiliar with recent literature on the subject.
If, however, a long compound noun includes a technical term in 
your field, keep that part of the compound and unpack the rest:
Physicians misdiagnose
5
 thought disorders
3,4
 in young
1
 children
2
 
because they are unfamiliar with recent literature on the subject.
Exercise 4.6
Revise the compound noun phrases in these sentences:
 1. Diabetic patient blood pressure reduction may be brought 
about by renal depressor application.
 2. The goal of this article is to describe text comprehension pro-
cesses and recall protocol production.

 Lesson 4 Characters 63
clarity and the professional voice
Every group expects its members to show that they accept its 
 values by adopting its distinctive voice. The apprentice banker 
must learn not only to think and look like a banker, but also to 
speak and write like one. Too often, though, aspiring  professionals 
try to join the club by writing in its most complex technical 
 language. When they do, they adopt an exclusionary style that 
erodes the trust a civil society depends on, especially in a world 
where information and expertise are now the means to power and 
control.
It is true that some research can never be made clear to in-
telligent lay readers—but less often than many researchers think. 
Here is an excerpt from Talcott Parsons, a social scientist who was 
as revered for his influence on his field as he was ridiculed for the 
opacity of his prose.
Apart from theoretical conceptualization there would appear to be 
no method of selecting among the indefinite number of varying kinds 
of factual observation which can be made about a concrete phenom-
enon or field so that the various descriptive statements about it ar-
ticulate into a coherent whole, which constitutes an “adequate,” a 
“determinate” description. Adequacy in description is secured insofar 
as determinate and verifiable answers can be given to all the scientifi-
cally important questions involved. What questions are important is 
largely determined by the logical structure of the generalized concep-
tual scheme which, implicitly or explicitly, is employed.
We can make that clearer to moderately well-educated readers:
Without a theory, scientists have no way to select from everything they 
could say about a subject only that which they can fit into a  coherent 
whole that would be an “adequate” or “determinate”  description. 
 Scientists describe something “adequately” only when they can verify 
answers to all the questions they think are important. They decide what 
questions are important based on their implicit or explicit theories.
 3. On the basis of these principles, we may now attempt to formu-
late narrative information extraction rules.
 4. This paper is an investigation into information processing behav-
ior involved in computer human cognition simulation.
 5. Enforcement of guidelines for new automobile tire durability 
must be a Federal Trade Commission responsibility.
 6. The Social Security program is a monthly income floor guarantee 
based on a lifelong contribution schedule.

64 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Exercise 4.7
Go through a page of your own writing. Circle all of the nomi-
nalizations and label all of the verbs as active or passive. For each 
nominalization and for each passive verb, state the specific reason 
you used it. If you cannot give a reason, revise it.
Exercise 4.8
Select a passage from a major work in your field. With a colleague,  
analyze its professional voice. What sorts of characters does it use? 
What is the balance between active and passive verbs? How are nomi-
nalizations used? How, and how extensively, does it use metadis-
course? Try to distinguish traits specific to this work from those that 
characterize the field’s professional voice. Now, revise a passage of your  
own writing so that it imitates that voice. What did you have to change?
And we could make even it more concise:
Whatever you describe, you need a theory to fit its parts into a whole. 
You need a theory to decide even what questions to ask and to verify 
their answers.
My versions lose the nuances of Parsons’s passage and the last 
one loses some of its content, but his excruciating density numbs 
all but his most masochistically dedicated readers. Most readers 
would accept the tradeoff.
Here’s the point: When you read or write a style that 
seems complex, you must determine whether it needs to be 
so complex to express complex ideas precisely. A difficult 
style can needlessly complicate complex ideas as easily as 
simple ones. Einstein said that everything should be made 
as simple as possible, but no simpler. Accordingly, a style 
should be as complex as necessary, but no more.
If you detect a needlessly complex style when you read, 
look for characters and actions so that you can unravel for 
yourself the complexity the writer needlessly inflicted on you.
When you write, use the same tools to detect when you 
are guilty of gratuitous complexity and, if you are, revise. 
When you do, you follow the Writer’s Golden Rule: Write to 
others as you would have others write to you.
in yoUr own words

 Lesson 4 Characters 65
sUmming Up
 1.   Readers judge prose to be clear when subjects of sentences 
name characters and verbs name actions.
FixedSubjectVerb
VariableCharacterAction
 2. If you tell a story in which you make abstract nominalizations 
its main characters and subjects, use as few other nominaliza-
tions as you can:
 A nominalization is a replacement of a verb by a noun, often 
resulting in displacement of characters from subjects by nouns.
✓ When a nominalization replaces a verb with a noun, it often 
 
displaces characters from subjects.
  3. Use a passive if the agent of an action is self-evident:
 The voters reelected the president with 54% of the vote.
✓ The president was reelected with 54% of the vote.
  4.    Use a passive if it lets you replace a long subject with a short one:
 Research demonstrating the soundness of our reasoning and the 
need for action 
supported this decision.
✓ This decision was supported by research demonstrating the 
soundness of our reasoning and the need for action.
  5.    Use a passive if it gives your readers a coherent sequence of 
subjects:
✓ By early 1945, the Axis nations had been essentially defeated; 
all that remained was a bloody climax. The German borders had 
been breached, and both Germany and Japan were being bombed 
around the clock. Neither country, though, had 
been so devas-
tated that it could not resist.
  6. Use an active verb if it is a metadiscourse verb:
 The terms of the analysis must be defined.
✓ We must define the terms of the analysis.
  7. When possible, rewrite long compound noun phrases:
 We discussed the board
1
 candidate
2
 review
3
 meeting
4
 schedule
5
.
✓ We discussed the schedule
5
 of meetings
4
 to review
3
 candidates
2
  
for the board
1
.

66
Lesson 
5
Cohesion and 
Coherence
If he would inform, he must advance regularly from Things  
known to things unknown, distinctly without Confusion, and  
the lower he begins the better. It is a common Fault in Writers,  
to allow their Readers too much knowledge: They begin with  
that which should be the Middle, and skipping backwards and 
forwards, ’tis impossible for any one but he who is perfect  
in the Subject before, to understand their Work, and such an  
one has no Occasion to read it.
—Benjamin Franklin
The two capital secrets in the art of prose composition are  
these: first, the philosophy of transition and connection; or  
the art by which one step in an evolution of thought is made  
to arise out of another: all fluent and effective composition  
depends on the connections; secondly, the way in which  
sentences are made to modify each other; for the most  
powerful effects in written eloquence arise out of this  
reverberation, as it were, from each other in a rapid  
succession of sentences.
—Thomas de Quincey

 Lesson 5 Cohesion and Coherence 67
Understanding ConneCtions
So far, I’ve discussed clarity as if we could achieve it just by 
 mapping characters and actions onto subjects and verbs. But 
 readers need more than individually clear sentences before they 
feel a  passage “hangs together.” These two passages, for example, 
say much the same thing but feel very different:
 
1a. The basis of our American democracy—equal opportunity for 
all—is being threatened by college costs that have been rising fast 
for the last several years. Increases in family income have been 
 significantly outpaced by increases in tuition at our colleges and 
universities  during that period. Only the children of the wealthiest 
families in our society will be able to afford a college education if 
this trend continues. Knowledge and intellectual skills, in addi­
tion to wealth, will divide us as a people, when that happens. Equal 
 opportunity and the egalitarian basis of our democratic society could 
be eroded by such a divide.
✓ 1b. In the last several years, college costs have been rising so fast that 
they are now threatening the basis of our American democracy—
equal opportunity for all. During that period, tuition has significantly 
outpaced increases in family income. If this trend continues, a college 
education will soon be affordable only by the children of the wealth­
iest families in our society. When that happens, we will be divided as 
a people not only by wealth, but by knowledge and intellectual skills. 
Such a divide will erode equal opportunity and the egalitarian basis 
of our democratic society.
The first seems choppy, even disorganized; the second seems more 
connected.
But like the word clear, the words choppy, disorganized, and 
connected refer not to the words on the page but to how they make 
us feel. What is it about the arrangement of words in (1a) that 
makes us feel we are moving through it in fits and starts? Why 
does (1b) seem to flow more easily? We base those judgments on 
two aspects of word order:
• We judge sequences of sentences to be cohesive depending on 
how each sentence ends and the next begins.
•	We judge a whole passage to be coherent depending on how all 
the sentences in a passage cumulatively begin. (Here I discuss 
the coherence of passages; in Lessons 7 and 8, I discuss the 
coherence of whole documents.)

68 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Cohesion
The Sense of Flow
In Lesson 4, we devoted a few pages to that familiar advice, Avoid 
passives. If we always did, we would choose the active verb in sen­
tence (2a) over the passive in (2b):
 
2a. The collapse of a dead star into a point perhaps no larger than a 
marble 
creates 
active
 a black hole.
 2b. A black hole is created 
passive
 by the collapse of a dead star into a 
point perhaps no larger than a marble.
But we might choose otherwise in context. Consider:
 
1
Some astonishing questions about the nature of the universe 
have been raised by scientists studying black holes in space. 
2a
The 
 collapse of a dead star into a point perhaps no larger than a 
marble creates a black hole. 
3
So much matter compressed into 
so little  volume changes the fabric of space around it in puzzling 
ways.
 
1
Some astonishing questions about the nature of the universe have 
been raised by scientists studying black holes in space. 
2b
A black 
hole is created by the collapse of a dead star into a point 
 perhaps no larger than a marble. 
3
So much matter  compressed 
into so little volume changes the fabric of space around it in 
 puzzling  ways.
In this context, our sense of “flow” calls not for (2a), the sentence 
with the active verb, but for (2b), the one with the passive.
The reason is clear: the last four words of the first sentence 
introduce an important character—black holes in space. But with 
sentence (2a), the next concepts we hit are collapsed stars and 
marbles, information that seems to come out of nowhere:
1
Some astonishing questions about the nature of the universe  
have been raised by scientists studying black holes in space. 
2a
The 
collapse of a dead star into a point perhaps no larger than a marble 
creates ...
If we follow sentence (1) with (2b), the sentence with the passive 
verb, we feel those sentences connect more smoothly, because now 
the first words in (2b) repeat what we just read at the end of (1):
1
.  .  . studying black holes in space. 
2b
A black hole is created by the 
 collapse of a dead star into a point perhaps no larger than a mar-
ble. 
3
So much matter compressed into so little volume changes 
the fabric of space around it in puzzling ways... .

 Lesson 5 Cohesion and Coherence 69
Note too that the passive lets us put at the end of sentence (2b) 
words that connect it to the beginning of sentence (3):
1
.  .  . black holes in space. 
2b
A black hole is created by the collapse of a 
dead star into a point perhaps no larger than a marble. 
3
So much 
matter compressed into so little volume changes the fabric of 
space around it in puzzling ways.
Here’s the point: Sentences are cohesive when the last 
few words of one set up information that appears in the first 
few words of the next. That’s what gives us our experience 
of flow. And in fact, that’s the biggest reason the passive is 
in the language: to let us arrange sentences so that they flow 
from one to the next easily.
Diagnosis and Revision: Old Before New
In sentences, readers prefer to encounter old, familiar information  
before they encounter new, unfamiliar information. So:
  1.  Begin sentences with information familiar to your readers.  
Readers get that familiar information from two sources. First, 
they remember words from the sentences they just read. That’s 
why in our example about black holes, the beginning of (2b) co­
heres with the end of (1) and why the beginning of (3) coheres 
with the end of (2b). Second, readers bring to a sentence a gen­
eral knowledge of its subject. We would not be surprised, for 
example, to find the next sentence (4) begin like this:
 ...  changes  the  fabric  of  space  around  it  in  puzzling  ways.   
4
Astronomers have reported that ...
The word Astronomers did not appear in the preceding  sentences, 
but since we are reading about space, we wouldn’t be surprised by 
a reference to them.
  2.  End sentences with information that readers cannot 
 anticipate. Readers always prefer to read what’s new and 
complex after they read what’s familiar and simple.
You can more easily see when others fail to observe this old­
before­new principle than when you do, because after you’ve 
worked on your own ideas for a while, they all seem familiar—to 

70 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
you. But hard as it is to distinguish old from new in your own 
writing, you have to try, because readers want to begin sentences 
with information that is familiar to them, and only then move on 
to information that is new.
In every sequence of sentences you write, you have to balance 
principles that make individual sentences clear and principles 
that make a passage cohesive. But in that tradeoff, give priority 
to  helping readers create a sense of cohesive flow. Fortunately, the 
principle of old before new cooperates with the principle of char­
acters as subjects. Once you mention your main characters, read­
ers take them as familiar information. So when characters are up 
front, so is familiar information.
Quick Tip:    Writers often refer to something in a pre­
vious sentence with words such as this, these, that, those, 
another, such, second, or more. When you use any of those 
signals, try to put them at or close to the beginning of a 
sentence:
 How to calculate credits for classes taken in a community 
colleges is another issue that we must consider.
✓ Another issue that we must consider is how to calculate 
credits for classes taken in a community college.
Here’s the point: So far, we have identified three main 
principles of clarity. Two are about sentences:
•	Make main characters the subjects of sentences.
•	Make important actions verbs.
The third is about sentences as well, but it also explains 
how sentences flow together:
•	Put old information before new information.
These principles usually complement one another, but if 
you have to choose among them, favor the third. The way 
you  organize old and new information determines how 
 cohesive readers will find your writing. And for readers, a 
passage’s overall cohesion trumps the clarity of individual 
sentences.

 Lesson 5 Cohesion and Coherence 71
CoherenCe 
A Sense of the Whole
When you create cohesive flow, you take the first step toward 
helping readers feel that your prose hangs together. But they will 
judge you to be a competent writer only when they also feel that 
your writing is coherent. It’s easy to confuse the words cohesion 
and coherence because they sound alike.
• Think of cohesion as pairs of sentences fitting together in the 
way two pieces of a jigsaw puzzle do (recall the black hole 
sentences).
•	Think of coherence as seeing what all the sentences in a piece 
of writing add up to, the way all the pieces in a puzzle add up 
to the picture on the box.
This next passage has good cohesive flow because we move 
from one sentence to the next without a hitch:
Sayner, Wisconsin, is the snowmobile capital of the world. The 
buzzing of snowmobile engines fills the air, and their tank­like 
Exercise 5.1
Revise these two passages to improve their flow by putting old in-
formation first in each sentence. In (1), I boldface the words that I 
feel are old information.
  1. Two aims—the recovery of the American economy and the 
modernization of America into a military power—were in 
the president’s mind when he assumed his office. The drop 
in  unemployment figures and inflation, and the increase in 
the GNP testifies to his success in the first. But our increased 
involvement in international conflict without any clear set 
of political goals indicates less success with the second. 
 Nevertheless, increases in the military budget and a good deal 
of saber rattling pleased the American voter.
  2.  The components of Abco’s profitability, particularly growth in 
Asian markets, will be highlighted in our report to demonstrate 
its advantages versus competitors. Revenue returns along several 
dimensions—product type, end-use, distribution channels, etc.—
will provide a basis for this analysis. Likely growth prospects of 
Abco’s newest product lines will depend most on its ability in 
regard to the development of distribution channels in China, 
 according to our projections. A range of innovative strategies 
will be needed to support the introduction of new products.

72 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
tracks  crisscross the snow. The snow reminds me of Mom’s mashed 
 potatoes, covered with furrows I would draw with my fork. Her 
mashed potatoes usually make me sick—that’s why I play with 
them. I like to make a hole in the middle of the potatoes and fill it 
with melted butter. This behavior has been the subject of long chats 
 between me and my analyst.
Though its individual sentences are cohesive, that passage as a 
whole is incoherent. (It was created by six different writers, one 
of whom wrote the first sentence, with the other five sequentially 
adding one sentence, knowing only the immediately preceding 
one.) It is incoherent for three reasons:
  1.  The subjects of the sentences are entirely unrelated.
  2.  The sentences share no common themes or ideas.
  3. The paragraph has no one sentence that states what the whole 
passage is about.
I will discuss that second point in Lesson 6 and the third one in 
Lesson 8. The rest of this lesson focuses on the first point, shared 
subjects.
Subjects, Topics, and Coherence
For 500 years, English teachers have defined subject in two ways:
  1.  the “doer” of the action
  2. what a sentence is “about,” its main Topic
In Lessons 3 and 4, we saw why that first definition doesn’t work: 
The subjects of many sentences are not doers. Here, for example, 
the subject is an action: The explosion was loud. Here it is a qual­
ity: Correctness is not writing’s highest virtue. Here it is just a 
grammatical placeholder: It was a dark and stormy night.
But also flawed is that second definition: A subject is what a 
sentence is about. It is flawed because often, the subject of a sen­
tence doesn’t state its main topic, the idea that the rest of the 
sentence “comments” on. That “topicalizing” function can be per­
formed by other parts of a sentence.
For example, none of the 
main suBjecTs in these sentences 
names their topics.
• The main subject of this sentence is it, but the topic of the sen­
tence is your claim, the object of the preposition for:
 It is impossible for your claim to be proved.

 Lesson 5 Cohesion and Coherence 73
•	The subject of this sentence is I, but its topic is this question, 
the object of to:
 In regard to this question, I believe more research is needed.
•	The subject of this sentence is it, but its topic is our proposal, 
the subject of a verb in a subordinate clause:
 
It is likely that our proposal will be accepted.
•	The subject of this sentence is no one, but its topic is such re-
sults, a direct object shifted to the front for emphasis:
 Such results no one could have predicted.
Quick Tip:   When you start to read a passage whose 
ideas you expect to be difficult, skim it quickly to find its 
main characters. Then think about those characters before 
you begin reading carefully. What do you know about them? 
What other ideas do you associate with them? What would 
you expect to read about them? The more sharply you have 
characters in mind as you read, the more easily you will 
 understand stories about them.
Diagnosis and Revision: Topics
As with other issues of clarity, you can’t predict how readers will 
judge the flow of your writing just by reading it yourself, because 
you know it too well. You must analyze it more objectively. This 
passage feels choppy, out of focus, even disorganized:
 
Consistent ideas toward the beginnings of sentences help readers 
understand what a passage is generally about. A sense of coherence 
arises when a sequence of topics comprises a narrow set of related 
ideas. But the context of each sentence is lost by seemingly random 
shifts of topics. Unfocused paragraphs result when that happens.
Here’s how to diagnose and revise such passages:
  1.  Diagnose
a. Underline the first seven or eight words of every sentence in 
a passage, stopping when you hit a verb.
b. If you can, underline the first five or six words of every 
clause in those sentences.

74 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Quick Tip:   When you start to draft a new section of 
your paper, list the characters you intend to write about. 
 Include not just flesh­and­blood characters, but important 
concepts as well. Before you draft, think about each character 
for a moment. Try to picture the people or things on your 
list. What are they like? For a concept, think about the ideas 
you associate with it. Then as you draft, try to put those char­
acters into the subjects of most of your sentences. If you do 
not mention one of those characters for several sentences, 
you may have gotten off track.
 Consistent ideas toward the beginnings of sentences, especially in 
their subjects, help readers understand what a passage is generally 
about. A sense of coherence arises when a sequence of topics com­
prises a narrow set of related ideas. But the context of each sentence 
is lost by seemingly random shifts of topics. Unfocused, even disorga­
nized paragraphs result when that happens.
  2.  Analyze
a. Do the underlined words constitute a relatively small set 
of related ideas? Even if you see how they are related, will 
your readers? For that passage, the answer is no.
b. Do the underlined words name the most important charac­
ters, real or abstract? Again, the answer is no.
  3. Rewrite
a. In most (not necessarily all) of your sentences, use subjects 
to name their topics.
b. Be sure that those topics are, in context, familiar to your 
readers.
Here is that passage revised, with the new topics boldfaced:
 Readers understand what a passage is generally about when they 
see consistent ideas toward the beginnings of sentences, especially 
in their subjects. They feel a passage is coherent when they read a 
sequence of topics that focuses on a narrow set of related ideas. But 
when topics seem to shift randomly, readers lose the context of each 
sentence. When that happens, they feel they are reading paragraphs 
that are unfocused and even disorganized.
Now the subjects form a strong Topic sTring: readers, they, they, they,  
topics, readers, that, they [readers].

 Lesson 5 Cohesion and Coherence 75
Here’s the point: Before you begin writing, name the 
things you are writing about. Those are your topics. They 
should be short, concrete, familiar words, and more often 
than not, they should name the main characters in your 
story. Most of your subjects should be topics. Most impor­
tant, be consistent: do not vary your subjects for the sake of 
variety. Your topics should tell your readers what a passage 
is globally “about.”
avoiding distraCtions at the Beginning  
of a sentenCe
It is hard to begin a sentence well. Readers want to get to a  subject/
topic quickly, but too often we begin sentences in ways that keep 
readers from getting there. It’s called throat-clearing. Throat­ 
clearing typically begins with metadiscourse (review pp. 58–59) 
that connects a sentence to the previous one, with transitions such 
as and, but, therefore:
 
And therefore ...
We then add a second kind of metadiscourse that expresses our at­
titude toward what is coming, words such as fortunately, perhaps, 
allegedly, it is important to note, for the most part, or in a manner 
of speaking:
 And therefore, it is important to note ...
Then we indicate time, place, or manner:
 And therefore, it is important to note that, in Eastern states since 
1980 ...
Only then do we get to the subject/topic:
 And, therefore, it is important to note that, in Eastern states since 
1980, acid rain has become a serious problem.
When you open several sentences like that, your readers have a 
hard time seeing not just what each sentence is about, but the fo­
cus of the whole passage. When you find a sentence with lots of 
words before its subject/topic, revise:
✓ 
Since 1980, therefore, acid rain has become a serious problem in the 
Eastern states.

76 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Exercise 5.2
Revise these passages to give them more consistent topic strings. 
Identify words that name what the passages “comment” on and 
use those words as subjects of most of the sentences. In (1), words 
that could be consistent subjects/topics are boldfaced.
  1.  Vegetation covers the earth, except for those areas continu-
ously covered with ice or utterly scorched by continual heat. 
Richly fertilized plains and river valleys are places where plants 
grow most richly, but also at the edge of perpetual snow in 
high mountains. The ocean and its edges as well as in and 
around lakes and swamps are densely vegetated. The cracks of 
busy city sidewalks have plants in them as well as in seemingly 
barren cliffs. Before humans existed, the earth was covered 
with vegetation, and the earth will have vegetation long after 
evolutionary history swallows us up.
  2.  The power to create and communicate a new message to fit 
a new experience is not a competence animals have in their 
natural states. Their genetic code limits the number and kind 
of messages that they can communicate. Information about 
distance, direction, source, and richness of pollen in flowers 
constitutes the only information that can be communicated by 
bees, for example. A limited repertoire of messages delivered 
in the same way, for generation after generation, is character-
istic of animals of the same species, in all significant respects.
  3.  The importance of language skills in children’s  problem- solving 
ability was stressed by Jones (1985) in his paper on chil-
dren’s thinking. Improvement in nonverbal problem solving 
was  reported to have occurred as a result of improvements 
in  language skills. The use of previously acquired language 
habits for problem articulation and activation of knowledge 
 previously learned through language are thought to be the 
cause of better performance. Therefore, systematic practice 
in the verbal formulation of nonlinguistic problems prior to 
 attempts at their solution might be an avenue for exploration 
in the enhancement of problem solving in general.
two QUalifiCations
Alleged Monotony
At this point, you may be conflicted by that common advice Vary 
how you begin your sentences. That’s a bad idea, especially when 
you change subjects just to make them different. You may think 
a passage is monotonous if you see the same topic in several 

 Lesson 5 Cohesion and Coherence 77
 sentences in your own prose. But your readers are less likely to 
notice, because they will be focusing on your ideas.
On the other hand, you might revise if you find you have used 
exactly the same words for the same topics in exactly the same po­
sitions. This passage goes over the top in that kind of consistency:
“Moral climate” is created when an objectivized moral standard for 
treating people is accepted by others. Moral climate results from 
norms of behavior that are accepted by society whereby if people con­
form they are socially approved of, or if they don’t they are shunned. 
In this light, moral climate acts as a reason to refrain from saying or 
doing things that the community does not support. A moral climate 
encourages individuals to conform to a moral standard and apply 
that standard to their own circumstances.
In such passages, you can vary a few of the words that refer to 
a repeated topic:
“Moral climate” is created... . This climate results... . In this light, 
morality acts... . A moral climate encourages... .
Be cautious, though: most writers change topics too often.
Faked Coherence
Some writers try to fake coherence by lacing their prose with con­
junctions like thus, therefore, however, and so on, regardless of 
whether they signal real logical connections. An example:
Because the press is the major medium of interaction between the 
president and the people, how it portrays him influences his popu­
larity. Therefore, it should report on the president objectively. Both 
reporters and the president are human, however, subject to error 
and favoritism. Also, people act differently in public than they do in 
private. Hence, to understand a person, it is important to know the 
whole person, his environment, upbringing, and education. Indeed, 
from the correspondence with his family, we can learn much about 
Harry S. Truman, our thirty­third president.
Experienced writers use these connecting devices, but they 
 depend more on the logical flow of their ideas. They are especially 
careful not to overuse words like and, also, moreover, another, and 
so on, words that say simply Here’s one more thing. You need a 
but or however when you contradict or qualify what you just said, 
and you can use a therefore or consequently to wind up a line of 
reasoning. But avoid using words like these more than a few times 
a page. Your readers don’t need them when your sentences are 
 cohesive and the passage they constitute is coherent.

78 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Exercise 5.3
In Lesson 4 (pp. 55–56), I noted that you could change the point of 
view of a passage by changing the characters/topics that appear as 
subjects in its sentences:
By early 1945, the Allies had essentially defeated Germany  . . . .
By early 1945, Germany had essentially been defeated by the Allies  . . . .
The first version is written from the point of view of the Allies, the 
second from that of Germany.
Experiment with the point of view of a passage of your own 
writing. First, circle words that name characters/topics, wherever 
they appear. Then underline the subject of every clause. You should 
see that some characters/topics appear most often as subjects, 
while others appear most often in other parts of your sentences 
(likely after the verb). Revise the passage by using characters/topics 
that appear after the verb as subjects and by moving characters/
topics used as subjects after the verb. What changes do you notice 
in the feel or even meaning of the passage?
Exercise 5.4
Writers often violate the principle that old information should 
 appear before new information because they know their own writ-
ing too well: to them, everything can seem like old information. So 
work with a reader to analyze the flow of old and new information 
in a passage of your writing. Have a reader go through a passage of 
your writing and underline every piece of new information. If the 
beginnings of sentences are underlined, you need to revise. Do so.
Exercise 5.5
Writers use conjunctions and transitions like also, furthermore, 
moreover, another, but, however, although, nevertheless, and 
 consequently to help readers see the connections among their 
ideas. But such words can also be used to bluff, to fake connections 
that aren’t really there. Writers are most likely to fake connections 
when they are struggling to figure out or to express their ideas. 
Select a piece of writing you are struggling with, and have a reader 
call your bluffs. Ask your reader circle words that assert logical 
 connections that don’t seem to be there. Then revise as necessary.
in YoUr own words

 Lesson 5 Cohesion and Coherence 79
sUmming Up
We can integrate the principles about old and new information 
and strings of consistent topics with the principles from Lessons 3 
and 4 about characters as subjects and actions as verbs (I’ll fill in 
the empty box in Lesson 6):
FixedTopic
VariableFamiliar                    New
FixedSubjectVerb
VariableCharacterAction
The principles from this lesson are these:
  1.    Begin sentences with subjects that communicate old informa­
tion, information that your readers are familiar with (bold­
faced); give new, unfamiliar information (italicized) toward 
the ends of sentences:
 The number of dead in the Civil War exceeded all other wars in 
American history combined. A reason for the lingering animosity 
between North and South today is the memory of this terrible 
carnage.
✓ Of all the wars in American history, none has exceeded the Civil 
War in the number of dead. The memory of this terrible carnage 
is one reason for the lingering animosity between North and South 
today.
  2.    Through a series of sentences, keep your topics short and rea­
sonably consistent:
 Competition by Asian companies with American companies 
in the Pacific is the first phase of this study. Labor costs and 
the ability to introduce new products quickly in particular 
are examined. A plan that will show American industry how to 
 restructure its facilities will be developed from this study.
✓ In the first phase of this study, we examine how Asian compa-
nies compete with American companies in the Pacific region. We 
examine in particular their labor costs and ability to introduce 
new products quickly. We develop from this study a plan that will 
show American industry how to restructure its facilities.

80
Beginning and end shake hands with each other.
—German Proverb
In the end is my beginning.
—T. S. elioT
All’s well that ends well.
—William ShakeSPeare
underStAndinG hoW SentenCeS end
If you consistently write sentences whose subjects/topics name a 
few central characters and join them to strong verbs, you’ll likely 
get the rest of the sentence right, and in the process create a pas-
sage that is both cohesive and coherent. But if the first few words 
of a sentence are worth special attention, so are the last few. How 
you end your sentences affects how readers judge not only the 
clarity and strength of individual sentences, but also their collec-
tive cohesion and coherence.
When readers build up momentum in the first nine or ten 
words of a sentence, they more easily get through complicated 
material that follows. Compare:
 1a. A sociometric and actuarial analysis of Social Security revenues 
and disbursements for the last six decades to determine changes in 
projecting deficits is the subject of this study.
Lesson 
6
Emphasis

 Lesson 6 Emphasis 81
✓ 1b. In this study, we analyze Social Security’s revenues and dis-
bursements for the last six decades, using sociometric and actuarial 
 criteria to determine changes in projecting deficits.
As we start (1a), we struggle to understand its technical terms at 
the same time we are hacking through a subject twenty-two words 
long. In (1b), we go through just five words to get past a subject 
and verb and twelve more before we hit a term—sociometric—that 
might slow us down. By that point we have enough momentum to 
carry us through the complexity to the sentence’s end.
Complex Grammar
Which of these two sentences do you prefer?
 2a. Lincoln’s claim that the Civil War was God’s punishment of both 
North and South for slavery appears in the last part of the speech.
 2b. In the last part of his speech, Lincoln claims that God gave the 
Civil War to both North and South as a punishment for slavery.
Most readers prefer (2b), because it begins simply with a short 
introductory phrase followed by a one-word subject and a specific 
verb, then moves toward grammatical complexity. We discussed 
that issue in Lesson 5.
Complex Meaning
Another kind of complexity is in the meanings of words, especially 
technical terms. Compare these two passages:
 3a.  The role of calcium blockers in the control of cardiac irregu-
larity can be seen through an understanding of the role of calcium 
in the  activation of muscle cells. The regulatory proteins actin, 
 myosin, tropomyosin, and troponin make up the sarcomere. The 
 energy- producing, or ATPase, protein myosin makes up its thick 
 filament, while actin, tropomyosin, and troponin make up its thin fil-
ament.  Interaction of myosin and actin triggers muscle contraction.
✓  3b.  When a muscle contracts, it uses calcium. If we can under-
stand how calcium affects muscle contraction, we can explain how 
the drugs called “calcium blockers” control cardiac irregularity. 
The basic unit of muscle contraction is the sarcomere. It has two 
 filaments, one thin and one thick. Those filaments consist of four 
proteins that regulate contraction: actin, tropomyosin, and tro-
ponin in the thin filament and myosin in the thick one. Muscles 
contract when a protein in the thin filament, actin, interacts with 
the protein in the thick filament, myosin, an energy-producing or 
ATPase protein.

82 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Both passages use the same technical terms, but (3b) is clearer to 
those who know nothing about the chemistry of muscles.
Those passages differ in two ways. First, information that is 
only implicit in (3a) is stated explicitly in (3b). More important, 
note how almost all the technical terms in (3a) are toward the 
 beginnings of their sentences and the familiar ones are toward  
the end:
 
3a.  The role of calcium blockers in the control of cardiac irregu-
larity can be seen through an understanding of the role of calcium in 
the activation of muscle cells.
 The regulatory proteins actin, myosin, tropomyosin, and tropo-
nin make up the sarcomere.
 The energy-producing, or ATPase, protein myosin makes up its 
thick filament, while actin, tropomyosin, and troponin make up  
its thin filament.
 Interaction of myosin and actin triggers muscle contraction.
In (3b), those technical terms appear at the ends of their sentences:
 . . . uses calcium.
 . . . “calcium blockers” control cardiac irregularity
 . . . is the sarcomere.
 . . . actin, tropomyosin, and troponin in the thin filament and 
 myosin in the thick one.
 . . . myosin, an energy-producing or ATPase protein.
These ways of introducing unfamiliar terms work even for 
prose intended for professional readers. In this next passage, from 
the New England Journal of Medicine, the writer deliberately uses 
metadiscourse just to put the new technical term at its end:
The incubation of peripheral-blood lymphocytes with a lympho-
kine, interleukin-2, generates lymphoid cells that can lyse fresh, 
noncultured, natural-killer-cell-resistant tumor cells but not 
 normal  cells. We term these cells lymphokine-activated killer 
(LAK) cells.
Here’s the point: Your readers want you to organize your 
sentences to help them manage two kinds of difficulty:
•	long and complex phrases and clauses
•	new information, particularly unfamiliar technical terms

 Lesson 6 Emphasis 83
Another neW term: StreSS
In the last lesson, we said that the first few words of a sentence are 
especially important because they state its topic, what the  sentence 
is “about ” or “comments” on. The last few words of a  sentence are 
also particularly important, because they receive special empha-
sis. You can sense that when you hear your voice rise at the end 
of a sentence to emphasize one syllable more strongly than the 
others:
 . . . more strongly than the ó-thers.
We have the same experience when reading silently.
We’ll call this most emphatic part of a sentence its STreSS. How 
you manage the emphasis in that stress position helps establish the 
voice readers hear in your prose, because if you end a sentence 
on words that carry little meaning, your sentence will seem to end 
weakly.
 
Global warming could raise sea levels to a point where much of the 
world’s low-lying coastal areas would disappear, according to most 
atmospheric scientists.
✓ According to most atmospheric scientists, global warming could 
raise sea levels to a point where much of the world’s low-lying coastal 
areas would disappear.
In Lessons 4 and 5, we saw how different subjects/topics  create 
different points of view (pp. 55–56, 73–74). You can create differ-
ent  stylistic effects by managing how your sentences end.
Compare these next passages. One was written to blame an 
American president for being weak with Iran on arms control. The 
other is a revision that stresses Iran. The ends of the sentences tell 
you which is which:
 1a.  The administration has blurred an issue central to nuclear arms 
control, the issue of verification. Irresponsible charges, innuendo, 
In general, your sentences should begin with elements that 
are relatively short: a short introductory phrase or clause, 
followed by a short, concrete subject, followed by a verb 
 expressing a specific action. After the verb, the sentence can 
go on for several lines, if it is well constructed (see Lessons 10 
and 11). The general principle is to carry the reader not from 
complexity to simplicity, but from simplicity to complexity.

84 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
and leaks have submerged serious problems with Iranian compli-
ance. The objective, instead, should be not to exploit these concerns 
in order to further poison our relations, repudiate existing agree-
ments, or, worse still, terminate arms control altogether, but to insist 
on compliance and clarify questionable behavior.
 1b.  The issue of verification—so central to nuclear arms con-
trol—has been blurred by the administration. Serious problems 
with Iranian compliance have been submerged in irresponsible 
charges, innuendo, and leaks. The objective, instead, should  
be to clarify questionable behavior and insist on compliance—not 
to exploit these concerns in order to further poison our relations, 
 repudiate existing agreements, or, worse still, terminate arms 
 control  altogether. 
diAGnoSiS And reviSion: StreSS
If you have managed your subjects and topics well, you will, by 
default, put the words you want to emphasize toward the ends 
of your sentences. To test this, read your sentence aloud, and as 
you reach the last three or four words, tap your finger hard as if 
emphasizing them in a speech. If you tap on words that do not 
deserve strong emphasis, look for words that do. Then put those 
words closer to the end. Here are some ways to do that:
Three Tactical Revisions
  1.  Trim the end.
 Sociobiologists claim that our genes control our social behavior in 
the way we act in situations we are in every day.
Since social behavior means the way we act in situations . . . , 
we drop everything after behavior:
✓ Sociobiologists claim that our genes control our social behavior.
Here’s the point: Just as we look at the first few words of 
a sentence for point of view, we look to the last few words for 
emphasis. You can revise a sentence to emphasize particu-
lar words that you want readers to hear stressed and thereby 
note as particularly significant.

 Lesson 6 Emphasis 85
  2.  Shift peripheral ideas to the left.
 The data offered to prove ESP are weak, for the most part.
✓ For the most part, the data offered to prove ESP are weak.
Particularly avoid ending with anticlimactic metadiscourse:
 Job opportunities in computer programming are getting scarcer, 
it must be remembered.
✓ It must be remembered that job opportunities in computer 
 programming are getting scarcer.
  3.  Shift new information to the right. A more common way to 
manage stress is by moving new information to the end of a 
sentence.
 Questions  about  the  ethics  of  withdrawing  intravenous  
 feeding are more difficult [than something just mentioned].
✓ More difficult [than something just mentioned] are questions 
about the ethics of withdrawing intravenous feeding.
Six Syntactic Devices to Emphasize the Right Words
There are several syntactic devices that let you manage where in  
a sentence you stress units of new information. (You just read one  
of them.)
  1.  There shift Some editors discourage all there is/there are 
 constructions, but using them lets you shift a subject to the 
right to emphasize it. Compare:
 Several syntactic devices let you manage where in a sentence 
you locate units of new information.
✓ There are several syntactic devices that let you manage where in 
a sentence you locate units of new information.
Experienced writers commonly begin a paragraph with there 
to introduce new topics and concepts that they develop in 
 sentences that follow.
  2.  Passives (for the last time) A passive verb lets you flip a 
 subject and object. Compare these sentences:
 Some claim that our genes influence 
active
 aspects of behavior  
that we think are learned. Our genes, for example, seem to 
 determine . . .
✓ Some claim that aspects of behavior that we think are learned are 
in fact influenced 
passive
 by our genes. Our genes, for example, 
seem to determine . . .

86 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
The passive is in the language so that we can get old and new 
information in the right order.
  3.  What shift This is another device that shifts a part of the 
 sentence to the right, thereby emphasizing it more:
 We need a monetary policy that would end fluctuations in money 
supply, unemployment, and inflation.
✓ What we need is a monetary policy that would end fluctuations in 
money supply, unemployment, and inflation.
  4.  It shift When you have a subject consisting of a long noun 
clauSe, you can move it to the end of the sentence and start 
with an it:
 That oil prices would be set by OPEC once seemed inevitable.
✓ It once seemed inevitable that oil prices would be set by  
OPEC.
  5.  Not only X, but (also) Y (as well) In this next pair, note how 
the but emphasizes the last element of the pair:
 We must clarify these issues and develop trust.
✓ We must not only clarify these issues, but also develop trust.
  6.  Pronoun substitution and ellipsis This is a fine point: a sen-
tence can end flatly when you repeat a word that you used just 
a few words before at the end of a sentence, because the voice 
we hear in our mind’s ear drops off at the end. If you read 
aloud the preceding sentence, this one, and the next, you can 
hear that drop at the end of each sentence. To avoid that kind 
of flatness, rewrite or use a pronoun instead of repeating the 
word at the end of the sentence. For example:
 A sentence will seem to end flatly if at its end you use a word 
that you used just a few words before, because when you repeat 
that word, your voice drops. Instead of repeating the noun, use a 
 pronoun. The reader will at least hear emphasis on the word just 
before it.
Occasionally, you can just delete words that repeat earlier 
ones:
 It is sometimes possible to represent a complex idea in a simple 
sentence, but more often you cannot.
One  of  the  characteristics  of  especially  elegant  prose  is  
how writers use a handful of rhetorical figures to end their 
 sentences. I will discuss those devices in Lesson 11.

 Lesson 6    Emphasis 87
Exercise 6.1
Revise these sentences to emphasize the right words. In the first 
three, I boldfaced what I think should be stressed. Then eliminate 
wordiness, nominalizations, etc.
 1. The President’s tendency to rewrite the Constitution is the big-
gest danger to the nation, in my opinion, at least.
 2. A new political philosophy that could affect our society well into 
the twenty-first century may emerge from these studies.
 3. There are limited opportunities for faculty to work with individ-
ual students in large American colleges and universities.
 4. Building suburban housing developments in floodplains has led 
to the existence of extensive and widespread flooding and eco-
nomic disaster in parts of our country in recent years, it is now 
clear.
 5. The teacher who makes an assignment of a long final term paper 
at the end of the semester and who then gives only a grade and 
nothing else such as a critical comment is a common object of 
complaint among students at the college level.
 6. Renting textbooks rather than buying them for basic required 
courses such as mathematics, foreign languages, and English, 
whose textbooks do not go through yearly changes, is feasible, 
however, economically speaking.
Quick Tip:   You can easily check whether you have 
stressed the right words by reading your sentences aloud: As 
you speak the last few words, raise your voice and tap the 
table with your fingers. If you’ve stressed the wrong words, 
your voice and table thumping will feel wrong:
 It is sometimes possible to represent a complex idea in a 
simple sentence, but more often you cannot represent it in 
that kind of sentence.
If you’ve stressed the right words, your voice and table 
thumping will feel right:
 It is sometimes possible to represent a complex idea in a 
simple sentence, but 
more OFten you canNOT.

88 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Exercise 6.2
Revise these passages so that their sentences begin with appropri-
ate topics and end with appropriate emphasis.
 1. The story of King Lear and his daughters was a popular one 
during the reign of Queen Elizabeth. At least a dozen avail-
able books offered the story to anyone wishing to read it, by 
the time Elizabeth died. The characters were undeveloped in 
most of these stories, however, making the story a simple nar-
rative that stated an obvious moral. When he began work on 
Lear, perhaps his greatest tragedy, Shakespeare must have had 
several versions of this story available to him. He turned the 
characters into credible human beings with complex motives, 
however, even though they were based on the stock figures of 
legend.
  2. Whether the date an operation intends to close down might be 
part of management’s “duty to disclose” during contract bar-
gaining is the issue here, it would appear. The minimization of 
conflict is the central rationale for the duty that management 
has to bargain in good faith. In order to allow the union to put 
forth proposals on behalf of its members, companies are obli-
gated to disclose major changes in an operation during bargain-
ing, though the case law is scanty on this matter.
 3. Athens’ catastrophic Sicilian Invasion is the most important event 
in Thucydides’ History of the Peloponnesian War. Three-quarters  
of the history is devoted to setting up the invasion because  
of this. Through the step-by-step decline in Athenian society  
that Thucydides describes, we can see how he chose to antici-
pate the Sicilian Invasion. The inevitability that we associate with 
the tragic drama is the basic reason for the need to anticipate the  
invasion.
Topics, Emphasis, ThEmEs, and cohErEncE
There is one more function performed by the stress of  certain 
  sentences,  one  that  helps  readers  think  a  whole  passage  is  
 coherent. As we saw in Lesson 5, readers take the clearest topic to 
be a short noun phrase that comes early in a sentence, usually as 
its subject. That’s why most of us judge this next paragraph to be 
unfocused: its sentences seem to open randomly, from no consis-
tent point of view:
 1a.  Great strides in the early and accurate diagnosis of Alzheimer’s 
disease have been made in recent years. Not too long ago, senility in 
an older patient who seemed to be losing touch with reality was  
often 
confused with Alzheimer’s. Genetic clues have become the basis of 

 Lesson 6 Emphasis 89
newer and more reliable tests in the last few years, however. The risk 
of human tragedy of another kind, though, has resulted from the 
 increasing accuracy of these tests: predictions about susceptibility to 
Alzheimer’s have become possible, long before the appearance of any 
overt symptoms. At that point, an apparently healthy person could be 
devastated by such an early diagnosis.
If we revise that passage to make the topics more consistent, we 
also make it more coherent (topics are boldfaced):
✓ 
1b. In recent years, researchers have made great strides in the early 
and accurate diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Not too long ago, when 
a physician examined an older patient who seemed out of touch 
with reality, she had to guess whether the person was  senile or had 
Alzheimer’s. In the past few years, however, physicians have been 
able to use new and more reliable tests focusing on genetic clues. But 
in the accuracy of these new tests lies the risk of another kind of 
human tragedy: physicians may be able to predict Alzheimer’s long 
before its overt appearance, but such an early diagnosis could psy-
chologically devastate an apparently healthy person.
The passage now focuses on just two topics: researchers/physicians 
and testing/diagnosis.
But there is one more revision that would make that passage 
more coherent still:
 Put key words in the stress position of the first sentence of a pas-
sage in order to emphasize the key ideas that organize the rest of it.
The first sentence of that paragraph stresses advances in diag-
nosis: . . . the early and accurate diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. 
But the point in this passage is not about diagnosis, but about its 
risks. That organizing concept, however, does not appear until we 
are more than halfway through that paragraph.
Readers would grasp the point of that passage better if all of 
its key concepts appeared in the first sentence, specifically toward 
its end, in its stress position. Readers read the opening sentence 
or two of a paragraph to find the key concepts that the paragraph 
will repeat and develop, and they specifically look for those con-
cepts in the last few words of those opening, introductory, framing 
sentences.
Here is a new first sentence for the Alzheimer’s paragraph 
that would help readers focus on the key concepts not just of 
 Alzheimer’s and new diagnoses, but of new problem and informing 
those most at risk:
 
In recent years, researchers have made great strides in the early and 
accurate diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease, but those diagnoses have 

90 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
raised a new problem about informing those most at risk who 
show no symptoms of it.
We can call those key concepts that run through a passage its 
ThemeS.
Look at the highlighted words in the passage below one more 
time:
•	The boldfaced words are all about testing.
•	The italicized words are all about mental states.
•	The capitalized words are all about a new problem.
Each of those concepts is announced toward the end of the new 
opening sentence, especially the theme of the new problem.
✓ 
1c.  In recent years, researchers have made great strides in the early 
and accurate diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease, but those diagnoses 
have raised 
a neW Problem about informinG ThoSe most at risk Who 
ShoW no symptoms of it. Not too long ago, when a physician exam-
ined an older patient who seemed out of touch with reality, she had to 
guess whether that person had Alzheimer’s or was only senile. In the 
past few years, however, physicians have been able to use new and 
more reliable tests focusing on genetic clues. But in the  accuracy 
of these new tests lies the 
riSk of anoTher kind of human TraGedy: 
physicians may be able to predict Alzheimer’s long before its overt 
appearance, but such an early diagnosis could 
PSycholoGically 
 
devaSTaTe an aPParenTly healThy PerSon.
That passage now “hangs together” not for just one reason, 
but for three:
•	Its topics consistently focus on physicians and diagnosis.
•	Running through it are strings of words that focus on the 
themes of (1) tests, (2) mental conditions, and (3) a new 
problem.
•	And no less important, the opening sentence helps us notice 
those themes by emphasizing them at its end.
Again, locate at the end of an introductory sentence words that an-
nounce the key themes that you intend to develop in the rest of the 
passage. This principle applies to sentences that introduce fairly 
long paragraphs (two- or three-sentence introductory,  transitional, 
and other kinds of paragraphs follow different patterns). It also 
applies to sentences that introduce passages of any length, even a 
whole document.

 Lesson 6 Emphasis 91
Here's the point: We depend on concepts running through 
a passage to create a sense of its coherence. You help readers 
identify those concepts in two ways:
•	Repeat those that name characters as topics of sentences, 
usually as subjects.
•	Repeat others as themes elsewhere in a passage, in 
nouns, verbs, and adjectives.
Readers are more likely to notice those themes if you em-
phasize them at the end of the sentence that introduces the 
passage.
Quick Tip:   For a paragraph more than five or six 
 sentences long, underline the sentence that you think best 
introduces or frames the rest of the paragraph. If you can’t 
do that quickly, your paragraph probably has a problem. 
If you can, circle the important words of that introductory 
segment. Those words should sound like a title for the para-
graph. If they do not, your readers may have a problem. We 
will  return to this matter in Lesson 8.
in your oWn WordS
Exercise 6.3
Read a page of your own writing aloud, raising your voice and 
tapping your fingers at the ends of your sentences (as suggested 
in the Quick Tip on page 87). What do you notice? How often do 
you seem to be stressing the wrong words, and how often the 
right ones? Can you detect any patterns? How does your meaning 
change when you inadvertently stress the wrong words?
Exercise 6.4
Have a reader use the Three Tactical Revisions on page 84 (“trim 
the end,” “shift peripheral ideas to the left,” or “shift new 

92 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
 information to the right”) to revise at least 4–5 sentences of your 
writing.
•	In trimming the ends of sentences, did your reader cut material 
that you thought was necessary? 
•	Did your reader treat as peripheral ideas that you thought 
were important?
•	Are you surprised by what your reader classified as “new 
information”?
Which  revisions  improved  your  writing,  and  which  did  not?   
Why?
SumminG uP
We can integrate the principles from this lesson with our others:
FixedTopicStress
VariableShort, simple, familiarLong, complex, new
FixedSubjectVerb
VariableCharacterAction
 1.    Use the end of a sentence to introduce long, complex, or oth-
erwise difficult-to-process material, particularly unfamiliar 
technical terms and new information.
 A determination of involvement of lipid-linked saccharides in 
the assembly of oligosaccharide chains of ovalbumin in vivo 
was the principal aim of this study. In vitro and in vivo studies 
utilizing oviduct membrane preparations and oviduct slices 
and the antibiotic tunicamycin were undertaken to accomplish 
this.
✓ The principal aim of this study was to determine how lipid-linked 
saccharides are involved in the assembly of oligosaccharide 
chains of ovalbumin in vivo. To accomplish this, studies were 
undertaken in vitro and in vivo, utilizing the antibiotic tunica-
mycin on preparations of oviduct membrane and on oviduct 
slices.

 Lesson 6 Emphasis 93
  2.    Use the stress position at the very end to emphasize words that 
you want your readers to hear emphasized in their minds’ ear:
 The administration has blurred an issue central to arms con-
trol, the issue of verification. Irresponsible charges, innuendo, 
and leaks have submerged serious problems with Iranian 
compliance.
 The issue of verification—so central to arms control—has been 
blurred by the administration. Serious problems with Iranian 
compliance have been submerged in irresponsible charges, in-
nuendo, and leaks.
  3.    Use the stress of a sentence that introduces a passage to an-
nounce the key themes that the rest of the passage will develop:
 In recent years, researchers have made great strides in the early 
and accurate diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease, but those diagno-
ses have raised 
a neW Problem about informinG ThoSe most at risk 
Who ShoW no symptoms of it. Not too long ago, when a physician 
examined an older patient who seemed out of touch with reality, 
she had to guess whether that person was senile or had Alzheimer’s.  
In the past few years, however, they have been able to use new and 
more reliable tests focusing on genetic clues. But in the  accuracy 
of these new tests lies the 
riSk of anoTher kind of  human  TraGedy: 
physicians may be able to predict Alzheimer’s long before its overt 
appearance, but such an early diagnosis could 
PSycholoGically 
devaSTaTe an aPParenTly healThy PerSon.

94 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
SUMMarY: Part 2
A simple English sentence is more than the sum of its words; 
it is a system of systems.
FixedTopicStress
VariableShort, simple, familiarLong, complex, new
FixedSubjectVerb
VariableCharacterAction
Readers have consistent preferences that you should try to 
meet:
  1. They want sentences to get to the subject of a main clause 
quickly, so avoid opening more than a few sentences 
with long, complex phrases and subordinate clauses.
  2.    They want sentences that get past the subject of a main 
clause to a verb quickly, so do this:
        a.   Keep subjects short and, if you can, concrete—ideally 
flesh-and-blood characters.
        b.  Open sentences with familiar information.
  3.   They want verbs that name specific actions, so do not 
bury actions in abstract nouns.
  4.   They deal with complexity more easily at the end of a 
sentence, so put there information that they will find 
least  familiar,  most  complex,  or  most  difficult  to  
understand.
  5.    They are confused when each sentence in a series opens 
with a different subject, so through a passage, focus on a 
few topics that define what that passage is “about.”

 Lesson 6 Emphasis 95
  6. They more easily understand the ideas in a passage when 
they can connect them to a few key concepts, so thread 
through a passage the themes that signal its most impor-
tant ideas.
In brief, write sentences that get to a short, concrete, famil-
iar subject quickly, join that subject to a verb that names a 
specific action, and keep your subjects consistent. Readers 
want to see those patterns not just in the main clause of a 
sentence, but in every subordinate clause as well.

This page intentionally left blank 

Part tHree
Clarity of Form
Well begun is half done.
—Anonymous
The beginning is half of the whole.
—PlAto

98
A problem well-put is half solved.
—John Dewey
Looking back, I think it was more difficult to see what the  
problems were than to solve them.
—ChArles DArwin
The formulation of a problem is often more essential than its 
solution, which may be merely a matter of mathematical or 
experimental skill. To raise new questions, new possibilities, 
to regard old questions from a new angle, requires creative 
imagination and marks real advance in science.
—Albert einstein
underStAndinG motivAtion
In Part Two, I focused on features of sentences and passages that 
lead readers to see them as clear and coherent and to understand 
them more easily. But features of longer units of discourse— 
paragraphs, sections, and whole documents—also  affect readers’ 
sense of clarity, coherence, and understanding. In Part Three,  
I turn to those. The first is your introduction. Getting that right 
helps readers see everything that follows as clear and coherent.
Lesson 
7
Motivation

 Lesson 7 Motivation 99
If we are deeply engaged in a topic, we will read anything 
about it we can get our hands on, even if we must work hard to 
understand it. Not only will we struggle through clotted sentences, 
but we’ll use our prior knowledge to fill in gaps, correct lapses in 
logic, and make sense of a tangled organization. A writer with that 
kind of reader has a big advantage.
But most writers are not so lucky. Most writers face readers 
who are not so deeply engaged or knowledgeable. Accordingly, 
they have to prepare their readers in two ways:
• They have to motivate readers so that they want to read 
carefully.
•	They have to let readers know what to expect so that they can 
read more knowledgeably.
We read most attentively when we read not just about an 
 interesting topic, but about a problem that is important to us—
from finding a good job to knowing the origins of life.
Stating Problems in Introductions
From the moment you begin to plan a writing project, don’t 
 imagine your task as just writing about a topic, passing on infor-
mation that interests you. See yourself as posing a problem that 
your readers want to see solved. That problem might, however, be 
one that your readers don’t yet care—or even know—about. If so, 
you face a challenge: you must overcome their inclination to ask, 
So what? And you get just one shot at answering that question: in 
your introduction. That’s where you must motivate readers to see 
your problem as theirs.
For example, read this introduction (all these examples are 
much shorter than typical ones).
 
1a. When college students go out to relax on the weekend, many now 
“binge,” downing several alcoholic drinks quickly until they are drunk 
or even pass out. It is a behavior that has been spreading through 
colleges and universities across the country, especially at large state 
universities. It once was done mostly by men, but now even women 
binge. It has drawn the attention of parents, college administrators, 
and researchers.
That introduction offers only a topic: it does not motivate us 
to care about it. Unless a reader is already interested in the issue, 
she may shrug and ask, So what? Who cares that college students 
drink a lot?

100 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Contrast that introduction with this one: it tells us why 
 bingeing is not just an interesting topic but a problem worth our 
attention:
 
1b. Alcohol has been a big part of college life for hundreds of years. 
From football weekends to fraternity parties, college students drink 
and often drink hard. But a new kind of drinking known as “binge” 
drinking is spreading through our colleges and universities. Bingers 
drink quickly not to be sociable but to get drunk or even to pass out. 
Bingeing is far from the harmless fun long associated with college 
life. In the last six months, it has been cited in at least six deaths, 
many injuries, and considerable destruction of property. It crosses 
the line from fun to reckless behavior that kills and injures not just 
drinkers but those around them. We may not be able to stop binge-
ing entirely, but we must try to control its worst costs by educating 
students in how to manage its risks.
As short as that is, (1b) has the three parts that appear in most 
introductions. Each part has a role in motivating a reader to read 
on. The parts are these:
Shared Context—Problem—Solution/Main Point/Claim
 Alcohol has been a big part of college life . . . drink hard. 
shared context
 
But a new kind of drinking known as “binge” drinking is spreading . . .  
kills and injures not just drinkers but those around them. 
problem
  
We may not be able to stop bingeing entirely, but we must try to 
 control its worst costs by educating students in how to manage its 
risks. 
solution/main point/claim
Part 1: Establishing a Shared Context
Most pieces of writing open with a shared context, as does (1b):
Alcohol has been a big part of college life for hundreds of years. From 
football weekends to fraternity parties, college students drink and 
often drink hard. 
shared context
 But a new kind of drinking known as 
“binge” . . .
That shared context offers historical background, but it might 
have been a recent event, a common belief, or anything else that 
reminds readers of what they know, have experienced, or readily 
accept.
 
Event: A recent State U survey showed that 80% of first-year students 
engaged in underage drinking in their first month on campus, a fact 
that should surprise no one. 
shared context
 But what is worrisome is the 
spread among first-year students of a new kind of drinking known as 
“binge” . . .

 Lesson 7 Motivation 101
 
Belief: Most students believe that college is a safe place to drink for 
those who live on or near campus. And for the most part they are 
right. 
shared context
 But for those students who get caught up in the new 
trend of “binge” drinking, . . .
These forms of shared context play a special role in motivating 
readers to read on: In (1b), I wanted you to accept that context as 
a seemingly unproblematic base for thinking about binge drinking 
just so that I could then challenge it. I set you up so that I could 
say, in effect, you may think you know the whole story, but you 
don’t. That but signals the coming qualification:
.  .  . drink and often drink hard. 
shared context
 BUT a new kind of 
 drinking known as “binge” drinking is spreading . . .
In other words, college drinking seems unproblematic, but it turns 
out not to be. I wanted that small surprise to motivate you to go on 
reading.
No opening move is more common among experienced writ-
ers: open with a seeming truth, then qualify or even reject it. 
You can find countless examples in newspapers, magazines, and 
especially professional journals. This opening context can be a 
sentence or two, as here; in a journal, it can be paragraphs long, 
where it is called a literature review, a survey of what researchers 
have said that the writer will qualify or correct.
Not every piece of writing opens with this move. Some jump 
directly to the second element of an introduction: the statement of 
a problem.
Part 2: Stating the Problem
If the writer opens with a shared context, she will typically intro-
duce the problem with a word such as but or however:
Alcohol has been a big part of college life for hundreds of years. 
From football weekends to fraternity parties, college students drink 
and often drink hard. 
shared context
 But a kind of drinking known as 
“binge” drinking is spreading through our colleges and universities. 
Bingers drink quickly not to be sociable but to get drunk or even 
to pass out. Bingeing is far from the harmless fun long associated 
with college life. In the last six months, it has been cited in at least 
six deaths, many injuries, and considerable destruction of property.  
It crosses the line from fun to reckless behavior that kills and in-
jures not just drinkers but those around them. 
problem
 We may not be  
able to . . .

102 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
The Two Parts of a Problem For readers to think that some-
thing is a problem, it must have two parts:
• The first part is some condition or situation: terrorism,  rising 
tuition, binge drinking, anything that has the potential to 
cause trouble.
•	The second part is the intolerable consequence of that condi-
tion, a cost that readers don’t want to pay.
That cost is what motivates readers. They want to eliminate or at 
least ameliorate it, because it makes them unhappy. The cost of 
terrorism is injury and death; the cost of rising tuition is more 
money out of their pockets. If rising tuition did not make parents 
and students unhappy, it would not be a problem.
You can identify the cost of a problem if you imagine someone 
asking So what? after you state its condition. Answer So what? 
and you have found the cost:
But a kind of drinking known as “binge” drinking is spreading 
through our colleges and universities. Bingers drink quickly not to 
be sociable but to get drunk or even to pass out. 
condition
 So what? 
 Bingeing is far from the harmless fun long associated with 
 college life. In the last six months, it has been cited in at least six 
deaths, many injuries, and considerable destruction of property. 
It crosses the line from fun to reckless behavior that kills and 
injures not just drinkers but those around them. 
cost of the condition
The condition part of the problem is binge drinking; the cost is 
death and injury. If bingeing had no cost, it would not be a prob-
lem. Readers have to see the condition and cost together before 
they recognize a problem.
Two Kinds of Problems: Practical and Conceptual There are 
two kinds of problems and each motivates readers in a different 
way. You have to write about them differently.
• A practical problem concerns a condition or situation in the 
world and demands an action as its solution. That students 
binge drink and harm themselves is a practical problem.
•	A conceptual problem concerns what we think about some-
thing and demands a change in understanding as a solu-
tion. That we don’t know why students binge is a conceptual 
problem.
Writers outside the academic world most often address practical 
problems; writers inside it most often address conceptual ones.

 Lesson 7 Motivation 103
Practical Problems: What We Should Do Binge drinking is an 
example of a practical problem for two reasons. First, it involves 
something that has a palpable cost that should make readers 
unhappy. Second, to solve it, someone must act differently.  
If we can’t avoid a practical problem, we must do something in  
the world to change the condition, to ameliorate or eliminate  
its costs.
We usually name a practical problem in a word or two:  cancer, 
unemployment, binge drinking. But that’s a shorthand. Those 
terms name only the condition: they say nothing about costs. Most 
conditions sound like trouble, but anything can be the condition 
of a problem if its palpable costs make you unhappy. If winning 
the lottery made you suffer the loss of friends and family, it would 
be a practical problem.
You may think that the costs of a problem like bingeing are 
too obvious to state, but you cannot count on readers to see 
the problem as you do. Some readers may see different costs: 
where you see death and injury, a university publicist might see 
only bad press: Those binge drinking students make us look like 
a party school, which hurts our image with parents. More cal-
lous readers might see no costs at all: So what if college students 
injure or kill themselves? What’s that to me? If so, you have to 
figure out how to make such readers see that those costs affect 
them. If you can’t describe the costs you see so that they matter 
to your readers, they have no reason to care about what you’ve 
written.
Conceptual Problems: What We Should Think A conceptual 
problem has the same two parts as a practical one, a condition 
and its costs. But beyond that, the two sorts of problem are very 
different.
•	The condition of a conceptual problem is always something 
that we do not know or understand.
We can express this condition as a question: How much does the 
universe weigh? Why does the hair on your head keep growing, but 
the hair on your legs doesn’t?
•	The cost of a conceptual problem is not the palpable unhap-
piness we feel from pain, suffering, and loss; it is the dis-
satisfaction we feel because we don’t understand something 
important to us.

104 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
We can express this cost as something more important that  readers 
don’t know, as another, larger question:
 Cosmologists do not know how much the universe weighs. 
condition
  
So what? Well, if they knew, they might figure out something more 
important: Will time and space go on forever, or end, and if they do, 
when and how? 
cost/larger question
 Biologists don’t know why some hair keeps growing and other hair 
stops. 
condition
 So what? If they knew, they might understand some-
thing more important: What turns growth on and off? 
cost/larger question
 Administrators do not know why students underestimate the risks of 
binge drinking. 
condition
 So what? If they knew, they might figure out 
something more important: Would better information at orientation 
help students make safer decisions about drinking? 
cost/larger question
Sometimes, as in the last example, the larger question is about 
something readers do not know how to do. But that is still a con-
ceptual problem, because it concerns our ignorance and because 
its solution is not an action but information.
Think of it like this: for a conceptual problem, you answer a 
small question so that your answer contributes to answering a 
larger, more important one. Readers are motivated because your 
small question inherits its importance from that larger one. 
If you can’t imagine a way in which the answer to your small 
question helps to address a larger, more important question, your 
question may not be worth asking. It seems unlikely that this ques-
tion would help us understand anything important: What color 
were Lincoln’s socks when he delivered the Gettysburg Address? But 
this one might: How did Lincoln plan the Address? If we knew that, 
we might learn about something more important: the nature of 
his creative process.
Here’s the point: Like your readers, you will usually be 
more motivated by large questions. But limited resources—
time, funding, knowledge, skill, pages—may keep you from 
addressing a large question satisfactorily. So you have to find 
a question you can answer. When you plan your paper, look 
for a question that is small enough to answer but is also con-
nected to another question large enough for you and your 
readers to care about.

 Lesson 7 Motivation 105
Quick Tip:    Some students think that they don’t need 
a problem statement when their teacher assigns a specific 
topic, but they are wrong. If your assignment includes words 
like discuss, explain, or analyze, your job is to find a question 
behind that assignment. If your assignment states a question 
but not its significance, your job is to find a good  answer 
to So what? Your paper will be both better written and  
better received if you begin it with a complete problem 
statement.
Quick Tip:    When you read an academic book or essay, 
look first for the implied question in its problem statement 
and then for its main claim, which answers that question. 
They will help focus your reading. If you don’t find a  question 
in the introduction, look for one in the conclusion. If that 
fails, find the main claim and ask yourself, What  question 
does this answer? The more you understand why a writer is 
telling you something, the better you will understand what 
she writes.
Part 3: Stating the Solution
The solution is your main point or claim. Practical and  conceptual 
problems differ in their solutions. We solve practical problems 
with action: readers (or someone) must change what they do. We 
solve conceptual problems with information: readers (or  someone) 
must change what they think. Your answer to a small  question then 
helps readers understand a larger one.
Practical Problems To solve a practical problem, you must 
propose that the reader (or someone) do something to change a 
condition in the world:
.  .  . behavior that crosses the line from fun to recklessness that kills 
and injures not just drinkers but those around them. 
problem
 We may 
not be able to stop bingeing entirely, but we must try to  control 
its worst costs by educating students in how to manage its  
risks. 
solution/point

106 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Conceptual Problems To solve a conceptual problem, you  
must state something the writer wants readers to understand or 
believe:
.  .  . we can better understand not only the causes of this dangerous 
behavior but also the nature of risk-taking behavior in general. 
problem  
This study reports on our analysis of the beliefs of 300 first-year 
college students. We found that students were more likely to 
binge if they knew more stories of other students bingeing, so 
that they believed that bingeing is far more common than it ac-
tually is. 
solution/point
As Darwin and Einstein said, nothing is more difficult than find-
ing a good question, because without one, you don’t have an an-
swer worth supporting.
Another Part: Prelude
You may recall being told to “catch your readers’ attention” by 
opening with a snappy quotation, fact, or anecdote. What best 
catches attention is a problem in need of a solution, but a catchy 
opening can vividly introduce themes central to your problem. To 
name this device, we can use a musical term: prelude. Writers in 
the natural and social sciences rarely use preludes. They are more 
common in the humanities and most common in writing for the 
general public.
Here are three preludes that could establish key themes in a 
paper about binge drinking.
  1. A Quotation
“If you’re old enough to fight for your country, you’re old enough 
to drink to it.”
  2.  A Startling Fact
A recent study reports that at most colleges three out of four stu-
dents “binged” at least once in the previous thirty days, consum-
ing more than five drinks at a sitting. Almost half binge once a 
week, and those who binge most are not just members of fraterni-
ties but their officers.
  3. An Illustrative Anecdote
When Jim S., president of Omega Alpha, accepted a dare from his 
fraternity brothers to down a pint of whiskey in one long swallow, 
he didn’t plan to become this year’s eighth college fatality from 
alcohol poisoning.

 Lesson 7 Motivation 107
We can combine all three:
It is often said that “if you’re old enough to fight for your country, 
you’re old enough to drink to it.”
quotation
 Tragically, Jim S., president 
of Omega Alpha, no longer has a chance to do either. When he ac-
cepted a dare from his fraternity brothers to down a pint of whiskey 
in one long swallow, he didn’t expect to become this year’s eighth 
college fatality from alcohol poisoning. 
anecdote
 According to a recent 
study, at most colleges, three out of four students have, like Jim, 
drunk five drinks at a sitting in the last thirty days. And those who 
drink the most are not just members of fraternities but—like Jim S. 
—officers. 
striking fact
Drinking, of course, has been a part of American college life since the 
first college opened . . . 
shared context
 But in recent years . . . 
problem
Here, then, is a general plan for your introductions:
Prelude
Shared Context
Problem [Condition + Cost]
Solution / Main Point / Claim
diAGnoSiS And reviSion: introduCtionS
To diagnose how well your readers will be motivated by your 
 introduction, do this:
  1.  Determine whether you are posing a practical or concep-
tual problem. Do you want readers to do something or to 
think something?
  2.  Draw a line after your introduction. If you cannot quickly 
locate the end of your introduction, neither will your readers, 
who might then miss both your problem and its solution, the 
main point of your paper.
  3.  Divide the introduction into its three parts: shared con-
text + problem + solution/main point/claim. If you cannot 

108 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
quickly make those divisions, your introduction is likely to 
seem unfocused.
  4.  Make sure the first word of the first sentence after the 
shared context is but, however, or some other word indi-
cating that you will challenge that shared context. If you 
don’t explicitly signal the contrast between the shared context 
and the problem, readers may miss it.
  5.  Divide the problem into two parts: condition and cost.
5a. Is the condition the right kind for the problem?
•	If you are addressing a practical problem, the condition 
must be something that exacts a palpable cost.
•	If  you  are  addressing  a  conceptual  problem,  the   
condition must be something not known or understood. 
This should be stated not as a direct question, What 
causes bingeing?, but as a statement of what we do not 
know: But we do not know why bingers ignore known 
risks.
5b. Does the cost appropriately answer So what?
•	If you are addressing a practical problem, the answer to 
So what? must state some palpable consequence of the 
condition that causes unhappiness.
•	If you are addressing a conceptual problem, the  answer 
to So what? must state some more significant issue that 
is not known or understood.
  6.  Underline your solution/main point/claim. This should 
 appear at the end of the introduction in its stress position, and 
should state the key themes that the rest of your paper will 
develop (more on that in Lesson 8). 
ConCluSionS
A good introduction motivates your readers, introduces your 
key themes, and states your main point, the solution to your 
motivating problem. Get your introduction straight, and read-
ers can read the rest more quickly and understand it better.  
A good conclusion serves a different end: as the last thing your 
reader reads, it should bring together your point, its significance, 
and its  implications for thinking further about your problem. 
 Conclusions vary more than introductions, but in a pinch, you 

 Lesson 7 Motivation 109
can map the parts of your introduction onto your conclusion. 
Just reverse their order:
  1.  Open your conclusion by stating (or restating) the gist of 
your point, the main claim of your paper, the solution to 
your problem:
 Though we can come at the problem of bingeing from several 
 directions, the most important is education, especially in the first 
week of a student’s college life. But that means each university 
must devote time and resources to it.
  2.  Explain its significance by answering So what? in a new 
way, if you can; if not, restate what you offered in the in-
troduction, now as a benefit:
 If we do not start to control bingeing soon, many more students 
will die.
 If we start to control bingeing now, we will save many lives.
  3.  Suggest a further question or problem to be resolved, 
something still not known. Answer Now what?:
 Of course, even if we can control bingeing, the larger issue of risk-
taking in general will remain a serious problem.
  4. End with an anecdote, quotation, or fact that echoes your 
prelude. We’ll call this by another musical term, your coda 
(again, used most often in popular writing, rarely in the 
natural and social sciences):
 We should not underestimate how deeply entrenched bingeing is: We 
might have hoped that after Jim S.’s death from alcohol poisoning, 
his university would have taken steps to prevent more such tragedies. 
Sad to say, it reported another death from  bingeing this month.
There are other ways to conclude, but this one works when 
 nothing better comes to mind.
in your oWn WordS
Exercise 7.1
For this exercise, you can use pieces of writing that are finished or 
still in progress. For each, draw a line between the problem and 
the solution. Underline the condition and bracket the cost. Classify 
the problem of each as conceptual or practical. Then rewrite the 

110 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
conceptual problems as practical ones and the practical  problems 
as conceptual ones. What did you have to change? Were some 
problems easier to rewrite in this way than others? Why?
Exercise 7.2
Writers, especially in academic contexts, can struggle more with 
problem statements than with other parts of their introductions. 
They know what they want to say, but they don’t know why other 
people should care. Or worse, they just assume that others will 
care because they do. (Students sometimes think they don’t need 
problem statements because the teacher assigned them a topic, 
but that’s a mistake.) It makes sense that writers would have this 
struggle. To state a problem, writers need to understand not only 
their own ideas but also the motives of their readers. This exercise 
will help you do that. For a project you are just beginning, do the 
following:
 1. In a sentence, state your topic: In this paper I am writing about 
 (e.g., science in Tennyson’s In Memoriam, the effects 
of Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission on election 
 financing, the space shuttle Columbia accident).
 2. In a sentence, state why you selected this particular topic out of 
the many you could have chosen: I care about my topic because 
. (If you cannot complete this sentence, you need to do 
more thinking about your topic or choose another. You cannot 
expect your readers to care if you can’t say why you do.)
 3. In a sentence, state your main point or claim: The point I want to 
make about [topic] is that 
.
 4. In a paragraph, describe one person (real or imagined) who 
would care deeply about your ideas. What does she (or he) 
look like? What does she do for a living? What are her personal 
 interests? What books has she read in the past two months?
 5. Now write a short letter to the person you have described, 
 explaining to her why she should care about your paper.
You will probably find phrases and ideas in this letter that you can 
use in your problem statement.
Exercise 7.3
Have a reader diagnose an introduction you have written using the 
procedure on p. 107–108:
 1. Determine whether the problem is practical or conceptual.
 2. Draw a line at the introduction’s end.

 Lesson 7    Motivation 111
 3. Divide the introduction into its three parts: shared context, the 
problem, and the solution/main point/claim. Do these three parts 
appear? Are they in the right order?
 4. Circle the word or phrase (usually but or however) that indicates 
that you are challenging the shared context.
 5. Divide the problem into its two parts: condition and cost. Does 
the cost answer the question So what?
 6. Underline your solution/main point/claim.
If your reader struggled with any of these steps, revise accordingly.
Alcohol has been a part of college 
life  for  hundreds  of  years.  From  
  f
ootball  weekends  to  fraternity  
 p
arties,  
co
llege students drink and 
often drink hard. 
shared context
Open  the  introduction  with  
shared  context,  a  brief  state-
ment  of  what  you  will  go  on  
to qualify or even contradict.
But   a   kind   of   drinking   known   
as   “binge”   drinking   is   spreading   
through  our  colleges  and  universi-
ties. Bingers drink quickly not to be 
sociable  but  to  get  drunk  or  even  to  
pass out. [So what?] 
condition
Follow  that  with  a    statement  
of    the    condition    of    the    
   problem.   Introduce   it   with   
a but,  however
,  on  the  other  
hand, etc. Imagine a So what? 
after it.
Bingeing  is  far  from  harmless.  In  
the   last   six   months,   it   has   been   
  cited  in  six  deaths,  many  injuries,  
and    
    
considerable    destruction    of    
 property
. It crosses the line from fun 
to    
reckless  behavior  that  kills  and  
injures  not  just  drinkers  but  those  
around them. 
costs
Answer   that   imagined   So 
what? with a statement of the 
consequences  of  that  condi-
tion,  its  costs  to  your  readers 
that they do not want to pay.
Summing up
You motivate purposeful reading with an introduction that states 
a problem readers want to see solved.
For a practical problem the key is to state its costs so clearly 
that readers will ask not So what? but What do we do? Here is a 
plan for introducing a practical problem:

112 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
We may not be able to stop bingeing 
entirely,  but  we  must  try  to  control  
its worst costs by educating students 
in how to manage its risks. 
solution
Conclude with a statement of 
the  solution  to  the  problem,  
an action  that  will  eliminate  
or   at   least   ameliorate   the   
costs.
For conceptual problems, the key is to state a small question 
worth answering because it helps to answer a larger, more signifi-
cant one. Here is a plan for introducing conceptual problems:
Colleges   are   reporting   that   binge   
drinking  is  increasing.  We  know  its  
practical  risks.  We  also  know  that  
bingers   ignore   those   risks,   even    
after    they    have    learned    about    
them.
shared context
Open  the  introduction  with  
shared  context,  a  brief  state-
ment  of  what  you  will  go  on  
to qualify or even contradict.
But   we   don’t   know   what   causes   
  bingers  to  ignore  the  known  risks:  
social  influences,  a  personality  at-
tracted  to  risk,  or  a  failure  to  un-
derstand the nature of the risks. [So 
what?] 
condition / first, small question
Follow  that  with  a  statement  
of  the  condition  of  the  prob-
lem.  Introduce  it  with  a  but, 
however,  on  the  other  hand, 
etc.  State  something  that  is  
not   known   or   well   under-
stood.  Imagine  a  So  what? 
after it.
If we can determine why bingers ig-
nore known risks of their actions, we 
can  better  understand  not  only  the  
causes  of  this  dangerous  behavior  
but also the nature of risk-taking be-
havior in  general. 
cost/second, larger question
Answer   that   imagined   So 
what?  with  the  cost  of  the  
condition,  a  larger  and  more  
important  issue  that  is  not  
known   or   understood   but   
that might be answered if we 
know  the  answer  to  the  first  
question.
In this study, we analyzed the beliefs 
of 300 first-year college students to  
determine . . . We found that . . . 
solution
Conclude  your  introduction  
with  a  statement  of  the  solu-
tion  to  the  problem,  an  an-
swer to the first question that 
helps answer the second one, 
as well.

113
Lesson 
8
Global Coherence
One of the most difficult things [to write] is the first  
paragraph. I have spent many months on a first paragraph,  
and once I get it, the rest just comes out very easily. In the  
first paragraph you solve most of the problems with your  
book. The theme is defined, the style, the tone.
—Gabriel García Márquez
Understanding How Frameworks  
sHape reading
In the last lesson, I explained how you must create an introduc-
tion that does two things:
• Motivate your readers by stating a problem that they care about.
•	Frame the rest of your document by stating the point and key 
concepts that you will develop in what follows.
In this lesson, I explain how that second point applies to all the 
parts of your document—its sections, subsections, and even 
 paragraphs. Like the term clear, the term coherent doesn’t  refer 
to anything we find on the page. Coherence is an experience 
we  create for ourselves as we make our own sense out of what  
we read.
What we look for on the page are signals that help us know 
what parts of our prior knowledge to bring to the text and how we 

114 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
can integrate what we read with the knowledge we have. You help 
your readers do that by building those signals into your writing 
deliberately. This lesson explains how to do that.
Forecasting tHemes to create coHerence
In Lessons 5 and 6, we looked at those features that help readers  
create “local” coherence in short passages, but readers need  
more to grasp the coherence of a whole document. To help them 
achieve that coherence, you can use a by-now-familiar principle: 
begin each document, its sections, and subsections with a short, 
easily grasped segment that states the point and introduces the 
themes that readers use to organize the rest. Then, in the body, 
support, develop, or explain the point and themes stated in the 
first part.
To help readers grasp the coherence of a document and its 
sections, follow these six principles:
For the document:
  1.  Readers must know where the introduction ends and the body 
begins, as well as where each section ends and the next begins. 
Identify the start of each new section with a heading that in-
cludes the key themes for that section (see 5 below). If your 
field does not use headings, delete them for the final draft.
  2.  At the end of the introduction, readers look for the document’s 
main point/solution to the problem, which should state the 
main themes developed in the rest. If you have good reason to 
save your main point for the conclusion, put a sentence at the 
end of the introduction that promises the point to come and 
states the main themes.
  3. In the body, readers look for the concepts announced as 
themes at the end of the introduction, using them to orga-
nize their understanding of the whole. Be sure that you repeat 
those themes regularly.
For each section and subsection:
  4.  Readers look for a short segment that introduces the section 
or subsection.
  5.  At the end of that introductory segment, readers look for a 
sentence that states both the point of the section and the spe-
cific concepts you will develop as distinctive themes for that 
section.

 Lesson 8 Global Coherence 115
  6. In the body of the section, readers look for the concepts 
 announced as themes at the end of the introductory segment, 
using them to organize their understanding of that section. Be 
sure that you repeat them regularly.
Quick Tip:    You can use these six principles to prepare 
yourself to read a difficult document. First, highlight the 
question in the problem statement and the main claim that 
answers it (see pp. 101–105). Next, for each section,  highlight 
its introduction, point, and key concepts. If you don’t find 
them in the introduction to a section, look for them at the 
end of the section. Finally, read through just the parts that 
you highlighted. When you then begin reading in detail, 
you will have in mind an overview that will help you better 
 understand and remember the rest.
In the limited space we have here, I can’t illustrate these 
 principles with entire documents or even long sections. So I will 
use paragraphs and ask you to relate their structure to that of a 
whole section of a document.
For example, read this:
 
1a.  Thirty sixth-grade students wrote essays that were analyzed to 
determine the effectiveness of eight weeks of training to distinguish 
fact from opinion. That ability is an important aspect of making 
sound arguments of any kind. In an essay written before instruc-
tion began, the writers failed almost completely to distinguish fact 
from opinion. In an essay written after four weeks of instruction, the 
students visibly attempted to distinguish fact from opinion, but did 
so inconsistently. In three more essays, they distinguished fact from 
opinion more consistently, but never achieved the predicted level of 
performance. In a final essay written six months after instruction 
ended, they did no better than they did in their pre-instruction essays. 
Their training had some effect on their writing during the instruction 
period, but it was inconsistent, and six months after instruction it 
had no measurable effect.
The first few sentences introduce the rest, but we don’t see in 
them the key concepts that follow: inconsistently, never achieved, 
no better, no measurable effect; those terms are crucial to the point 
of the whole passage. Worse, we don’t get to that point until we get 

116 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
to the end of the passage: training had no long-term effect. And so 
as we read, the passage seems to ramble, until the end, when we 
learn what we need to know to make sense of it retrospectively. 
But that takes more effort than we should have to expend.
Compare this version:
 
1b.  In this study, thirty sixth-grade students were taught to distin-
guish fact from opinion. They did so successfully during the instruc-
tion period, but the effect was inconsistent and less than predicted, 
and six months after instruction ended, the instruction had no 
 measurable effect. In an essay written before instruction began, the 
 writers failed almost completely to distinguish fact from opinion. In 
an essay written after four weeks of instruction, the students visibly 
 attempted to distinguish fact from opinion, but did so inconsistently. 
In three more essays, they distinguished fact from opinion more con-
sistently, but never achieved the predicted level of performance. In 
a final essay written six months after instruction ended, they did no 
better than they did in their pre-instruction essay. We thus conclude 
that short-term training to distinguish fact from opinion has no con-
sistent or long-term effect.
In (1b), we quickly grasp that the first two sentences introduce 
what follows. And in the second sentence, we see two things: both 
the point of the passage (underlined) and its key terms (boldfaced):
 
1b.   In  this  study,  thirty  sixth-grade  students  were  taught  to  
 distinguish fact from opinion. They did so successfully during the 
instruction period, but the effect was inconsistent and less than 
predicted, and six months after instruction ended, the instruction 
had no measurable effect. 
point of the passage
Consequently, we feel the passage hangs together better, and we 
read it with more understanding.
Now imagine two documents: in one, the point of each section 
and of the whole appears at its end (as in 1a) and what openings 
there are do not introduce the key terms that follow; in the other, 
each point appears in an introductory segment to every paragraph, 
section, and of the whole (as in 1b). Which would be easier to 
read and understand? The second, of course. Keep in mind this 
principle: 
Put the point sentence at the end of the short opening seg-
ment; make it the last sentence that your reader reads before start-
ing the longer, more complex segment that follows.
• In a paragraph, the introductory segment might be just a sin-
gle sentence, so by default, it will be the last sentence read-
ers read before they read what follows. If the passage has a 

 Lesson 8 Global Coherence 117
two-sentence introduction (as did 1b), be sure the point of the 
paragraph is the second sentence, still making it the last thing 
readers read before they read the rest.
•	For sections, your introduction might be a paragraph or more. 
For a whole document, you might need several paragraphs. 
Even in those cases, put your point sentence at the end of that 
introductory segment, no matter how long it is. Make your 
point the last thing readers read before they begin reading the 
longer, more complex segments that follow.
Some inexperienced writers think that if they tip off their main 
point in their introduction, readers will be bored and not read 
on. Not true. If you motivate readers with an interesting problem, 
they will want to see how you address it.
Here’s the point: To write a document that readers will 
think is coherent, open every unit—section, subsection, and 
the whole—with a short, easily grasped introductory seg-
ment. At the end of that opening segment, put a sentence 
that states both the point of the unit and the key concepts 
that follow. Such “point” sentences constitute the outline of 
your document, its logical structure. If readers miss them, 
they may judge your writing to be incoherent.
two more reqUirements For coHerence
We can make sense of almost anything we read if we know its 
points. But to make full coherent sense of a passage, we must see 
two more things.
  1.  Readers must see how everything in a section or whole is 
relevant to its point. Consider this passage:
 
We analyzed essays written by sixth-grade students to determine 
the effectiveness of training in distinguishing fact from opinion. 
In an essay written before training, the students failed almost 
completely to distinguish fact and opinion. These essays were also 
badly organized in several ways. In the first two essays after train-
ing began, the students attempted to distinguish fact from opin-
ion, but did so inconsistently. They also produced fewer spelling 
and punctuation errors. In the essays four through seven, they dis-
tinguished fact from opinion more consistently, but in their final 

118 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
essay, written six months after completion of instruction, they did 
no better than they did in their first essay. Their last essay was sig-
nificantly longer than their first one, however. Their training thus 
had some effect on their writing during the training period, but it 
was inconsistent and transient.
What are those sentences about spelling, organization, and  
length doing there? When readers can’t see the relevance of sen-
tences to a point, they are likely to judge what they read as being 
incoherent.
I am sorry to say that I can’t give you a simple rule of relevance, 
because it’s so abstract a quality. I can only list its most important 
kinds. Sentences are relevant to a point when they offer these:
•	background or context
•	points of sections and the whole
•	reasons supporting a point
•	evidence, facts, or data supporting a reason
•	an explanation of reasoning or methods
•	consideration of other points of view
  2. Readers  must  see  how  the  parts  of  your  document  
are  ordered. Readers want to see not just how everything 
they read is relevant to a point, but what principle is be-
hind the  order of its parts. We look for three kinds of order: 
 chronological, coordinate, and logical.
•	Chronological This is the simplest order, from earlier to 
later (or vice versa), as a narrative or as cause and effect. 
Signal time with first, then, finally; signal cause and effect 
with as a result, because of that, and so on. The passage 
about the essay research was chronologically organized.
•	Coordinate Two or more sections are coordinate when 
they are like pillars equally supporting a common roof. 
There are three reasons why . . . Order those sections so that 
their  sequence makes sense to your reader—by importance, 
complexity, and so on—then signal that order with words 
and phrases such as first, second, . . . or also, another, more 
 important, in addition, and so on. That’s how this section on 
order is organized.
•	Logical This is the most complex order: by example and 
generalization (or vice versa), premise and conclusion (or 
vice versa), or by assertion and contradiction. Signal logic 
with for example, on the other hand, it follows that . . .

 Lesson 8 Global Coherence 119
on paragrapHs
It would be easy to say that all paragraphs should follow these 
principles:
• Begin with one or two short, easily grasped sentences that 
frame what follows.
•	State the point of the paragraph (in traditional terms its topic 
sentence) in the last sentence of its introduction. If the intro-
duction is just one sentence, it will be its point, by default.
•	Toward the end of that point sentence, name the key themes 
that thread through what follows.
The problem is, not all paragraphs follow that tidy structure, 
and we get through most of the ones that don’t just fine. We can 
ignore short paragraphs that serve special functions, such as pro-
viding a transition or an aside, because we have no problem read-
ing (or writing) them. But many substantial paragraphs of six or 
seven sentences or more seem to have no evident principle of de-
sign. Even so, we can see in most of them some kind of opening 
segment that frames the rest of the paragraph. It might not in-
clude its point—that may come later, usually at its end. But the 
first sentence or two will set up what follows, introducing its key 
terms. And that is usually enough to help us make sense of what 
is to come.
For example, compare these two paragraphs:
  2a.   The  team  obtained  exact  sequences  of  fossils—new  lines  
of  antelopes, giraffes, and elephants developing out of old and 
 appearing in younger strata, then dying out as they were replaced 
by others in still later strata. The most specific sequences they 
 reconstructed were several lines of pigs that had been common at the 
site and had developed rapidly. The team produced family trees that 
dated types of pigs so accurately that when they found pigs next to 
Quick  Tip:    Writers  often  order  their  documents  
 chronologically because that is easiest for them. Once you 
have drafted a paper, read it through to see whether you have 
organized it simply as a narrative of your thinking. If you 
have, consider revising. Most readers aren’t interested in how 
you thought through an issue; they want to see the results of 
your having done it.

120 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
 fossils of  questionable age, they could use the pigs to date the fossils.  
By  mapping every  fossil precisely, the team was able to recreate 
 exactly how and when the animals in a whole ecosystem evolved.
 2b.  By precisely mapping every fossil they found, the team was able to 
recreate exactly how and when the animals in a whole ecosystem evolved. 
They charted new lines of antelopes, giraffes, and elephants developing 
out of old and appearing in younger strata, then dying out as they were 
replaced by others in still later strata. The most exact sequences they re-
constructed were several lines of pigs that had been common at the site 
and had developed rapidly. The team produced family trees that dated 
types of pigs so accurately that when they found pigs next to fossils of 
questionable age, they could use the pigs to date the fossils.
Paragraph (2a) makes its point in the last sentence; paragraph 
(2b) in its first sentence. But in the context of an otherwise coher-
ent text about fossil hunters and their work, we wouldn’t have a 
big problem understanding (2a).
And that only emphasizes why it is so important to introduce 
the sections and subsections of your document clearly, accurately, 
and helpfully. If your readers begin a section knowing its point, 
they can make their way through a few paragraphs that are less 
than perfect. But if they don’t know what your paragraphs add 
up to, then no matter how well written they are individually, your 
readers may well feel lost.
a Basic principle oF clarity
This basic principle applies to individual sentences, to substantive 
paragraphs, to sections and subsections, and to wholes:
Readers are more likely to judge as clear any unit of writing that 
opens with a short segment that they can easily grasp and that frames 
the longer and more complex segment that follows.
• In a simple sentence, that short, easily grasped segment is a 
subject/topic. Compare these two:
     1a.     Resistance in Nevada against its use as a waste disposal site 
has been heated.
     1b.     Nevada 
has heatedly resisted its use as a waste disposal site.
•	In a complex sentence, that short, easily grasped segment is a 
Main clause that expresses the point of its sentence. Compare 
these two:
 2a. Greater knowledge of pre-Columbian civilizations and the 
effect of European colonization destroying their societies by 

 Lesson 8 Global Coherence 121
 inflicting on them devastating diseases has led to a historical 
 reassessment of Columbus’ role in world history.
     2b.     Historians are reassessing Columbus’ role in world history, 
 because they know more about pre-Columbian civilizations and 
how European colonization destroyed their societies by inflicting 
on them devastating diseases.
The point of sentence (2a) is buried at its end. In (2b), the  opening 
clause states the main point of the sentence, its most important 
claim: Historians are reassessing Columbus’ role . . . That claim 
is then supported by the longer and more complex clause that 
follows.
•	In a paragraph, that short, easily grasped unit is an introduc-
tory sentence or two that both expresses the point of the para-
graph and introduces its key concepts. Compare these two 
paragraphs:
 3a. Thirty sixth-grade students wrote essays that were analyzed 
to determine the effectiveness of eight weeks of training to dis-
tinguish fact from opinion. That ability is an important aspect of 
making sound arguments of any kind. In an essay written before 
instruction began, the writers failed almost completely to dis-
tinguish fact from opinion. In an essay written after four weeks 
of instruction, the students visibly attempted to distinguish fact 
from opinion, but did so inconsistently. In three more essays, 
they distinguished fact from opinion more consistently, but never 
achieved the predicted level. In a final essay written six months 
after instruction ended, they did no better than they did in their 
pre-instruction essay. Their training had some effect on their writ-
ing during the instruction period, but it was inconsistent, and six 
months after instruction it had no measurable effect.
     3b.     In this study, thirty sixth-grade students were taught to 
 distinguish fact from opinion. They did so successfully during 
the instruction period, but the effect was inconsistent and less 
than predicted, and six months after instruction ended, the 
 instruction  had no measurable effect. 
opening segment/point
 In an 
 essay written before instruction began, the writers failed almost 
completely to distinguish fact from opinion. In an essay written 
after four weeks of instruction, the students visibly attempted to 
distinguish fact from opinion, but did so inconsistently. In three 
more essays, they distinguished fact from opinion more consis-
tently, but never achieved the predicted level. In a final essay 
written six months after instruction ended, they did no better 
than they did in their pre-instruction essay. We thus conclude 
that short-term training to distinguish fact from opinion has no 
consistent or long term effect.

122 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Paragraph (3a) has no clearly distinguished opening unit, and it 
does not announce the key themes of the paragraph. Paragraph 
(3b) has a clearly marked opening unit that states the point, and it 
clearly announces the key themes of the paragraph.
•	In a section or subsection, that short, easily grasped unit may 
be just a paragraph; in longer units, it will be proportionally 
longer. Even so, at its end it expresses the point of its unit and 
introduces the key concepts that follow. There is not enough 
space here to illustrate how that principle applies to a passage 
several paragraphs long, but it is easy to imagine.
•	In a whole document, that introductory unit might be one or 
more paragraphs long, perhaps even a few pages. Even so, it 
should be substantially shorter than the rest, and in a sentence 
at its end, it states the point of the whole document and intro-
duces its key concepts.
Quick Tip:   Budget your time for both drafting and 
 revision so that you spend most of it on beginnings: the 
 introduction to the whole, then the introductions to  major 
sections,  then  introductions  to  subsections,  and  long  
 paragraphs, then the beginnings of sentences. Get  beginnings 
straight, and the rest is likely to take care of itself.
The Costs and Benefits of Cookie-Cutter Writing
Some writers fear that patterns like these will inhibit their creativity  
and bore their readers. That’s a reasonable concern, if you are 
writing a literary essay that explores your own thoughts as you 
have them, for readers who have the time and patience to follow 
the twists and turns of your thinking. If you are writing that kind 
of essay for that kind of reader, go to it. Don’t tie yourself to what 
I’ve said here.
On most occasions, however, most of us read less for aes-
thetic pleasures than to understand what we need to know. You 
help readers toward this end when you follow the principles of 
 clarity and coherence we’ve looked at in Parts Two and Three of 
this book.
Such writing may seem cut and dried—to you, because you 
will be so conscious of the forms you followed. But it earns the 

 Lesson 8 Global Coherence 123
gratitude of readers who have too little time to read, understand, 
and remember everything they must and who will, in any event, 
focus more on understanding the substance of your writing than 
on critiquing its form.
in yoUr own words
Exercise 8.1
A basic principle of clarity is that any unit of discourse—a  sentence, 
a paragraph, a section, a whole document—should begin with a 
short segment that introduces and frames the longer and more 
complex segment that follows. Go through a piece of your writ-
ing section by section. Draw a line after that short segment and 
circle words in that segment that signal key themes in what 
 follows. If you cannot, revise. Then repeat this exercise paragraph 
by paragraph.
Exercise 8.2
To feel a document (or a section of one) is coherent, a reader needs 
to understand how it is organized (review pp. 118-119). But  writers, 
 especially in early drafts, often organize their documents in the way 
that is easiest for them, not the way that is best for their readers.  
Specifically, writers often adopt a chronological or narrative struc-
ture by default. You can see why this is so. When getting ideas 
down on paper, it is easiest for writers simply to narrate their think-
ing or research. But most often, what readers do not want to hear 
a story of discovery but to understand a writer’s points. Revising 
for global coherence, therefore, often involves translating a docu-
ment from a chronological or narrative structure to a coordinate or 
 logical one. A reader can help you do this.
Go through a document or section that you have organized 
chronologically. Highlight your points, paragraph by paragraph, 
and copy them onto index cards. Shuffle the cards and give them 
to a reader. Have a reader put the cards into what seems like their 
right order. Reorganize your document or section so that it follows 
that order. What did you have to change?

124 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
sUmming Up
Plan your paragraphs, sections, and the whole on this model:
Researchers  have  made  strides  in  the   
early   and   accurate      diagnosis   of    
 Alzheimer’s,    [but    those        diagnoses  
have   raised   
a new huMan probleM 
about informing those  at  risk  before   
they show any symptoms of it.] 
point
Open each unit with a 
 relatively short segment 
introducing it.
End that segment with a 
sentence stating the point of 
that unit.
Toward the end of that point 
sentence, use key themes that 
the rest of the unit develops.
Not  too  long  ago,  when  physicians  
examined an older patient who seemed  
out  of  touch  with  reality,  they  had  
to guess   whether   that      person   had    
Alzheimer’s  or  was  only  senile.  In  the  
past  few  years,    however,  they  have  
been   able   to   use   new   and   more   
 reliable    tests      focusing   on   genetic   
clues.  But  in  the  accuracy  of  these  
new  tests  lies  the  
risk of another  
kind of   huMan traGedy:  Physicians  
may  be  able  to  predict Alzheimer’s  
long      before   its   overt   appearance,    
but such an  early diagnosis could 
psy-
choloGically devastate an   apparently 
healthy  person.
In the longer  segment that 
follows, use  consistent topics 
 
(underlined).
Repeat key terms  introduced 
toward the end of the 
 opening  segment  (boldfaced, 
 italicized,  and  capitalized).
Make every sentence  follow 
the old-new  principle.
Order sentences,  paragraphs, 
and sections in a way that 
readers understand.
Make all sentences  relevant 
to the point of the unit that 
they  constitute.

Part FoUr
Grace
There are two sorts of eloquence; the one indeed scarce 
deserves the name of it, which consists chiefly in 
laboured and polished periods, an over-curious and 
artificial arrangement of figures, tinseled over with a 
gaudy embellishment of words. . . . The other sort of 
eloquence is quite the reverse to this, and which may be 
said to be the true characteristic of the holy scriptures; 
where the eloquence does not arise from a laboured and 
farfetched elocution, but from a surprising mixture of 
simplicity and majesty.
—Laurence Sterne

126
Often I think writing is sheer paring away  
of oneself leaving always something thinner,  
barer, more meager.
—F. Scott FitzgeraLd
The ability to simplify means to eliminate the  
unnecessary so that the necessary may speak.
—HanS HoFmann
To a Snail: If “compression is the first grace of style,”  
you have it.
—marianne moore
Understanding ConCision
You write more clearly when you match your characters and 
 actions to your subjects and verbs, when you get the right char-
acters into topics and the right words under stress, when you 
 motivate readers with well-crafted introductions, and when you 
frame your paragraphs, sections, and documents to help read-
ers grasp their global coherence. But readers may still think your 
prose a long way from graceful if it’s anything like this:
 
In my personal opinion, it is necessary that we should not ignore the 
opportunity to think over each and every suggestion offered.
Lesson 
9
Concision

 Lesson 9 Concision 127
That writer matched characters with subjects, and actions 
with verbs, but in too many words: opinion is always personal, 
so we don’t need personal, and since this statement is opinion, we 
don’t need in my opinion. Think over and not ignore both mean 
consider. Each and every is redundant. And suggestion is by defini-
tion offered. In fewer words:
✓ 
We should consider each suggestion.
Though not elegant, that sentence at least has style’s first 
grace—compression, or as we’ll call it, concision.
diagnosis and revision
Six Principles of Concision
When I edited that sentence about suggestions, I followed six 
principles:
  1.  Delete words that mean little or nothing.
  2.  Delete words that repeat the meaning of other words.
  3.  Delete words implied by other words.
  4.  Replace a phrase with a word.
  5.  Change negatives to affirmatives.
  6. Delete useless adjectives and adverbs.
Those principles are easy to state but hard to follow, because you 
have to inch your way through every sentence you write, cutting 
here, compressing there, and that’s labor intensive. Those six prin-
ciples, though, can guide you in that work.
  1.  Delete meaningless words. Some words are verbal tics that 
we use as unconsciously as we clear our throats:
kind of actually particular really certain various
virtually    individual    basically    generally    given    practically
 
Productivity actually depends on certain factors that basically 
 involve psychology more than any particular technology.
✓ 
Productivity depends on psychology more than on technology.
  2.  Delete doubled words. Early in the history of English, 
 writers got into the habit of pairing a French or Latin word 
with a native English one, because foreign words sounded 

128 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
more learned. Most paired words today are just redundant. 
Among the common ones:
full and completehope and trustany and all
true and accurateeach and everybasic and fundamental
hopes and desiresfirst and foremostvarious and sundry
  3.  Delete what readers can infer. This redundancy is common 
but hard to identify, because it comes in so many forms.
           Redundant Modifiers Often, the meaning of a word implies 
others, especially its modifier (boldfaced):
 
Do not try to predict future events that will completely revolutionize  
society, because past history shows that it is the final outcome of 
minor events that unexpectedly surprises us more.
✓ 
Do not try to predict revolutionary events, because history shows 
that the outcome of minor events surprises us more.
 Some common redundancies:
terrible tragedyvarious differentfree gift
basic fundamentalsfuture planseach individual
final outcometrue factsconsensus of opinion
           Redundant  Categories  Every  word  implies  its  gen-
eral  category, so you can usually cut a word that names it 
(boldfaced):
 
During that period of time, the membrane area became pink in 
color and shiny in appearance.
✓ 
During that period, the membrane became pink and shiny.
 In doing that, you may have to change an adjective into an 
adverb:
 
The holes must be aligned in an accurate manner.
✓ 
The holes must be aligned accurately.
Sometimes you change an adjective into a noun:
 
The county manages the educational system and public recre-
ational activities.
✓ 
The county manages education and public recreation.

 Lesson 9 Concision 129
Here are some general nouns (boldfaced) often used redundantly:
large in sizeround in shapehonest in character
unusual in natureof a strange typearea of mathematics
of a bright colorat an early timein a confused state
           General Implications This kind of wordiness is even harder 
to spot because it can be so diffuse:
 
Imagine someone trying to learn the rules for playing the game of 
chess.
 Learn implies trying, rules implies playing the game, chess is a 
game. So more concisely,
 
Imagine learning the rules of chess.
  4.  Replace a phrase with a word. This redundancy is especially 
difficult to fix, because you need a big vocabulary and the wit 
to use it. For example:
 
As you carefully read what you have written to improve wording 
and catch errors of spelling and punctuation, the thing to do before 
anything else is to see whether you could use sequences of subjects 
and verbs instead of the same ideas expressed in nouns.
That is,
✓ 
As you edit, first replace nominalizations with clauses.
I compressed five phrases into five words:
carefully read what you have writtenSedit
the thing to do before anything elseSfirst
use X instead of YSreplace
nouns instead of verbsSnominalizations
sequences of subjects and verbsSclauses
I can offer no principle that tells you when to replace a phrase 
with a word, much less give you the word. I can point out only 
that you often can, and that you should be alert for opportunities 
to do so—which is to say, try.
Here are some common phrases (boldfaced) to watch for. 
Note that some of these let you turn a nominalization into a verb 
(both italicized):
 
We must explain the reason for the delay in the meeting.
✓ 
We must explain why the meeting is delayed.

130 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
 Despite the fact that the data were checked, errors occurred.
✓ 
Even though the data were checked, errors occurred.
 
In the event that you finish early, contact this office.
✓ 
If you finish early, contact this office.
 
In a situation where a class closes, you may petition to get in.
✓ 
When a class closes, you may petition to get in.
 
I want to say a few words concerning the matter of money.
✓ 
I want to say a few words about money.
 
There is a need for more careful inspection of all welds.
✓ 
You must inspect all welds more carefully.
 
We are in a position to make you an offer.
✓ 
We can make you an offer.
 
It is possible that nothing will come of this.
✓ 
Nothing may come of this.
 
Prior to the end of the training, apply for your license.
✓ 
Before training ends, apply for your license.
 
We have noted a decrease/increase in the number of errors.
✓ 
We have noted fewer/more errors.
  5.  Change negatives to affirmatives. When you express an idea 
in a negative form, not only must you use an extra word: same S    
not different, but you also force readers to do a kind of alge-
braic calculation. These two sentences, for example, mean 
much the same thing, but the affirmative is more direct:
 
Do not write in the negative. S Write in the affirmative.
You can rewrite most negatives:
not carefulScarelessnot manySfew
not the sameSdifferentnot oftenSrarely
not allowSpreventnot stopScontinue
not noticeSoverlooknot includeSomit
 Do not translate a negative into an affirmative if you want to 
emphasize the negative. (Is that such a sentence? I could have 
written, Keep a negative sentence when . . .)

 Lesson 9 Concision 131
  Some verbs, prepositions, and conjunctions are implicitly 
negative:
Verbspreclude, prevent, lack, fail, doubt, reject, avoid, 
deny, refuse, exclude, contradict, prohibit, bar
Prepositionswithout, against, lacking, but for, except
Conjunctionsunless, except when
  You can baffle readers if you combine not with these 
 negative words. Compare these:
 Except when you have failed to submit applications without 
 documentation, benefits will not be denied.
✓ 
You will receive benefits only if you submit your documents.
✓ 
To receive benefits, submit your documents.
  And you baffle readers completely when you combine 
explicitly and implicitly negative words with passives and 
nominalizations:
 
There should be no submission of payments without notification 
of this office, unless the payment does not exceed $100.
 
Do not submit payments if you have not notified this office, 
 unless you are paying less than $100.
Now revise the negatives into affirmatives:
✓ 
If you pay more than $100, notify this office first.
  6.  Delete adjectives and adverbs. Many writers can’t  resist add-
ing useless adjectives and  adverbs. Try deleting every  adverb 
and every adjective before a noun, then restore only those that 
readers need to understand the passage. In this  passage, which 
ones should be restored?
 At the heart of the argument culture is our habit of seeing issues 
and ideas as absolute and irreconcilable
 principles continually at 
war. To move beyond this static and limiting
 view, we can remem-
ber the Chinese
 approach to yin and yang. They are two principles, 
yes, but they are conceived not as irreconcilable polar
 opposites 
but as elements that coexist and should be brought into balance  
as much as possible
. As sociolinguist Suzanne Wong  Scollon 
notes, “Yin is always present in and changing into yang and  
vice versa.” How can we translate this abstract
 idea into daily 
practice?
—Deborah Tannen, The Argument Culture

132 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Exercise 9.1
Prune the redundancy from these sentences.
  1. Critics cannot avoid employing complex and abstract  technical 
terms if they are to successfully analyze literary texts and 
 discuss them in a meaningful way.
  2.  Scientific research generally depends on fully accurate data if it 
is to offer theories that will allow us to predict the future in a 
plausible way.
  3.  In regard to desirable employment in teaching jobs, prospects 
for those engaged in graduate-school-level studies are at best 
not certain.
  4.  Notwithstanding the fact that all legal restrictions on the use of 
firearms are the subject of heated debate and argument, it is 
necessary that the general public not stop carrying on discussions 
pro and con in regard to them.
  5.  Most likely, a majority of all patients who appear at a public 
medical clinical facility do not expect special medical attention 
or treatment, because their particular health problems and con-
cerns are often not major and for the most part can usually be 
adequately treated without much time, effort, and attention.
Where appropriate, change the following negatives to affirma-
tives, and do any more editing you think useful.
  6.  Except when expenses do not exceed $250, the Insured may 
not refuse to provide the Insurer with receipts, checks, or other 
 evidence of costs.
  7.  There is no possibility in regard to a reduction in the size of 
the federal deficit if reductions in federal spending are not 
introduced.
Here’s the point: Readers think you write concisely when 
you use only enough words to say what you mean.
1. Delete words that mean little or nothing.
2. Delete words that repeat the meaning of other words.
3. Delete words implied by other words.
4. Replace a phrase with a word.
5. Change negatives to affirmatives.
6. Delete useless adjectives and adverbs.

 Lesson 9 Concision 133
  8.  Do not discontinue medication unless symptoms of dizziness and 
nausea are not present for six hours.
  9.  No one should be prevented from participating in cost-sharing 
educational programs without a full hearing into the reasons for 
his or her not being accepted.
 10. No agreement exists on the question of an open or closed uni-
verse, a dispute about which no resolution is likely as long as 
a computation of the total mass of the universe has not been 
done.
 11. So long as taxpayers do not engage in widespread refusal to pay 
taxes, the government will have no difficulty in paying its debts.
 12. No alternative exists in this country to the eventual development 
of tar sand, oil shale, and coal as sources of fuel, if we wish to 
stop being energy dependent on imported oil.
 13. Not until a resolution between Catholics and Protestants in re-
gard to the authority of papal supremacy is reached will there be 
a start to a reconciliation between these two Christian religions.
Exercise 9.2
Here are two actual sentences from two “free” offers.
 
You will not be charged our first monthly fee unless you don’t cancel 
within the first thirty days.
 
To avoid being charged your first monthly fee, cancel your  membership 
before your free trial ends.
Which is less clear? Why might it have been written like that? 
 Revise  it.
redUndant MetadisCoUrse
Lesson 4 described metadiscourse as language that refers to the 
following:
• the writer’s intentions: to sum up, candidly, I believe
•	directions to the reader: note that, consider now, as you see
•	the structure of the text: first, second, finally, therefore, however
Everything you write needs metadiscourse, but too much buries 
your ideas:
 
The last point I would like to make is that in regard to men-women 
 relationships, it is important to keep in mind that the greatest 
changes have occurred in how they work together.

134 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Only  nine  of  those  thirty-four  words  address  men-women  
relationships:
 
men-women relationships . . . greatest changes . . . how they work 
together.
The rest is metadiscourse. When we prune it, we tighten the 
sentence:
 
The greatest changes in men-women relationships have occurred in 
how they work together.
Now that we see what the sentence says, we can make it still 
more direct:
✓ 
Men and women have changed their relationships most in how they 
work together.
How writers use metadiscourse varies by field, but you can usu-
ally cut these two types:
  1.  Metadiscourse That Attributes Your Ideas to a Source 
Don’t announce that something has been observed, noticed, 
noted, and so on; just state the fact:
High divorce rates have been observed to occur in areas that 
have been determined to have low population density.
✓ 
High divorce rates occur in areas with low population density.
  2. Metadiscourse That Announces Your Topic The boldface 
phrases tell your reader what your sentence is “about”:
This section introduces another problem, that of noise pollu-
tion. The first thing to say about it is that noise pollution exists 
not only . . .
   Readers  catch  the  topic  more  easily  if  you  reduce  the  
metadiscourse:
✓ 
Another problem is noise pollution. First, it exists not only . . .
   Two other constructions call attention to a topic, usually 
mentioned at least once in the text previous to it:
In regard to a vigorous style, the most important feature is a 
short, concrete subject followed by a forceful verb.
So far as China’s industrial development is concerned, it has 
long surpassed that of Japan.

 Lesson 9 Concision 135
   But you can usually work those topics into a subject:
✓ 
The most important feature of a vigorous style is a short, 
 concrete subject followed by a forceful verb.
✓ 
China has long surpassed Japan’s industrial development.
Hedges and intensifiers
Another kind of metadiscourse reflects the writer’s certainty about 
what she is claiming. Hedges qualify your certainty; intensifiers 
 increase it. Both can be redundant when used excessively. But 
they can also be useful, because they signal how well you balance 
caution and confidence and therefore influence how readers judge 
your character.
Hedges
These are common hedges:
Adverbsusually, often, sometimes, almost, virtually, possibly, 
 allegedly, arguably, perhaps, apparently, in some ways, to 
a certain extent, somewhat, in some/certain respects
Adjectivesmost, many, some, a certain number of
Verbsmay, might, can, could, seem, tend, appear, suggest, 
indicate
Too much hedging sounds mealy-mouthed, like this:
     There     seems to be some evidence to suggest that certain differ-
ences between Japanese and Western rhetoric could derive from his-
torical influences possibly traceable to Japan’s cultural isolation and 
Europe’s history of cross-cultural contacts.
On the other hand, only a fool or someone with massive historical 
evidence would make an assertion as flatly certain as this:
 
This evidence proves that Japanese and Western rhetorics differ 
 because of Japan’s cultural isolation and Europe’s history of cross-
cultural contacts.
In most academic writing, we more often state claims closer to this 
(note my own hedging; compare the more assertive, In  academic 
writing, we state claims like this):
✓ 
This evidence suggests that aspects of Japanese and Western rheto-
ric differ because of Japan’s cultural isolation and Europe’s history of 
cross-cultural contacts.

136 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
The verbs suggest and indicate let you state a claim about 
which you are less than 100-percent certain, but confident enough 
to propose:
✓ 
The  evidence  indicates  that  some  of  these  questions  remain  
unresolved.
✓ 
These data suggest that further studies are necessary.
Even confident scientists Hedge. This next paragraph intro-
duced the most significant breakthrough in the history of genetics, 
the discovery of the double helix of DNA. If anyone was entitled to 
be assertive, it was Crick and Watson. But they chose to be diffi-
dent (note, too, the first person we; hedges are boldfaced):
We wish to suggest a [not the] structure for the salt of  deoxyribose 
nucleic acid (D.N.A.) . . . A structure for nucleic acid has already 
been proposed by Pauling and Corey . . . In our opinion, this  
structure is unsatisfactory for two reasons: (1) We believe that  
the material which gives the X-ray diagrams is the salt, not the  
free  acid. . .  (2) Some of the van der Waals distances appear to be  
too small.
—J. D. Watson and F. H. C. Crick,  
“Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids”
Intensifiers
These are common intenSiFierS:
Adverbsvery, pretty, quite, rather, clearly, obviously, undoubt-
edly, certainly, of course, indeed, inevitably, invariably, 
always, literally
Adjectiveskey, central, crucial, basic, fundamental, major, princi-
pal, essential
Verbsshow, prove, establish, as you/we/everyone knows/can 
see, it is clear/obvious that
The most common intensifier, however, is the absence of a hedge.
Without the hedges, Crick and Watson’s claim would be more 
concise but more aggressive. Compare this (I boldface the stron-
ger words, but most of the aggressive tone comes from the absence 
of hedges):
 
We wish  to  suggest state  here  a the  structure  for  the  salt  of  
 deoxyribose nucleic acid (D.N.A.) . . . A structure for nucleic acid has 
 already been proposed by Pauling and Corey . . . In our opinion
, [T]

 Lesson 9 Concision 137
his structure is unsatisfactory for two reasons: (1) We believe that
  
[T]he  material which gives the X-ray diagrams is the salt, not the free 
acid  . . .  (2) Some of
 [T]he van der Waals distances appear to be are 
too small.
Confident  writers  use  intensifiers  less  often  than  they   
use hedges because they want to avoid sounding as assertive  
as this:
 
For a century now, all liberals have argued against any censorship 
of art, and every court has found their arguments so completely 
persuasive that not a person any longer remembers how they  
were countered. As a result, today, censorship is totally a thing of the 
past.
Some writers think that kind of aggressive style is persuasive. 
Quite the opposite. If you state a claim moderately, readers are 
more likely to consider it thoughtfully:
 
For about  a  century  now,  many  liberals  have  argued  against  
 censorship of art, and most courts have found their arguments 
 persuasive enough that few people may remember exactly how they 
were countered. As a result, today, censorship is virtually a thing of 
the past.
Some claim that a passage hedged that much is wordy and weak. 
Perhaps. But it does not come on like a bulldozer. It leaves room 
for a reasoned and equally moderate response.
Quick Tip:   When most readers read a sentence that 
 begins with something like obviously, undoubtedly, it is clear 
that, there is no question that, and so on, they reflexively think 
the opposite.
Here’s the point: You need some metadiscourse in every-
thing you write, especially metadiscourse that guides readers 
through your text, words such as first, second, therefore, on 
the other hand, and so on. You also need some metadiscourse 
that hedges your certainty, words such as perhaps, seems, 
could, and so on. The risk is in using too many.

138 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Exercise 9.3
Edit these for both unnecessary metadiscourse and redundancy.
  1. But, on the other hand, we can perhaps point out that there 
may always be TV programming to appeal to our most  prurient 
and, therefore, lowest interests.
  2.  In this particular section, I intend to discuss my position about the 
possible need to dispense with the standard approach to plea 
bargaining. I believe this for two reasons. The first reason is that 
there is the possibility of letting hardened criminals avoid receiv-
ing their just punishment. The second reason is the  following: 
plea bargaining seems to  encourage a growing lack of  respect 
for the judicial system.
  3.  Turning now to the next question, there is in regard to  wilderness 
area preservation activities one basic principle when attempting 
to formulate a way of approaching decisions about unspoiled 
 areas to be set aside as not open to development for commercial 
exploitation.
  4.  It is my belief that in regard to terrestrial-type snakes, an assump-
tion can be made that there are probably none in unmapped 
 areas of the world surpassing the size of those we already have 
knowledge of.
  5.  Depending on the particular position that one takes on this 
question, the educational system has taken on a degree of 
 importance that may be equal to or perhaps even exceed the 
family as a major source of transmission of social values.
Quick  Tip:    In  Lesson  7,  we  noted  that  problems 
 demand solutions expressed as points or claims. But be care-
ful about using metadiscourse when stating your solution, 
because it can allow you merely to announce a topic instead 
of advancing a claim. To avoid this pitfall, delete the metadis-
course (boldfaced) and rewrite what remains as a sentence:
 
 In this study, I examine the history of Congressional legis-
lation to protect children in the workplace.
✓ 
Congress has legislated to protect children in the workplace.
If the resulting claim seems self-evident, like this one, you 
need to say more, or to do more thinking about what you 
want to say.

 Lesson 9 Concision 139
ConCise, not terse
Having stressed concision so strongly, I must now step back. 
Readers don’t like flab, but neither do they like a style so terse 
that it’s all gristle and bone. Here is some amiable advice from the 
most widely read book on style, Strunk and White’s The Elements 
of Style:
 
Revising is part of writing. Few writers are so expert that they can 
produce what they are after on the first try. Quite often you will dis-
cover, on examining the completed work, that there are serious flaws 
in the arrangement of the material, calling for transpositions. When 
this is the case, a word processor can save you time and labor as you 
rearrange the manuscript. You can select material on the screen and 
move it to a more appropriate spot, or, if you cannot find the right 
spot, you can move the material to the end of the manuscript until 
you decide whether to delete it. Some writers find that working with 
a printed copy of the manuscript helps them to visualize the process 
of change; others prefer to revise entirely on screen. Above all, do not 
be afraid to experiment with what you have written. Save both the 
original and the revised versions; you can always use the computer 
to restore the manuscript to its original condition, should that course 
seem best. Remember, it is no sign of weakness or defeat that your 
manuscript ends up in need of major surgery. This is a common oc-
currence in all writing, and among the best writers. (205 words)
We can shorten that paragraph just by erasing its redundancy:
 
Revising is part of writing. Few writers are so expert that they can 
produce what they are after on the first try. Quite
 Often you will dis-
cover on examining the completed work, that there are serious
 flaws 
in the arrangement of the material. calling for transpositions
. When 
this is the case, a word processor can save you
 time and labor as you 
rearrange the manuscript. You can select material on the screen and
 
move [material] to a more appropriate spot, or, if you cannot find the 
right spot, you can move the material to the end of the manuscript 
until you decide whether to delete it. Some writers find that working 
with a printed copy of the
 manuscript helps them to visualize the 
process of change; others prefer to revise entirely on screen. Above 
all, do not be afraid to
 experiment with what you have written. Save 
both
 the original and the revised versions; you can always use the 
computer to restore the manuscript to its original condition, should 
that course seem best. Remember, It is no sign of weakness or defeat 
that your manuscript ends up in
 need[s] of major surgery. This is a 
common occurrence
 in all writing, and among the best writers. (139 
words)

140 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
With some rewording, we can cut that version by another third 
(revisions are italicized):
 
Revising is part of writing, because few writers produce what they are 
after on the first try write perfect first drafts. If you use a word proces-
sor and find Often you will discover serious
 flaws in your arrange-
ment, of the material. When this is the case, a word processor can 
save time as you rearrange the manuscript. you can select material 
on the screen and move material to a more appropriate spot, or, if  
you cannot find one, the right spot
, to the end of the manuscript 
 until you decide whether to delete it. Some writers find that  working 
with a printed manuscript helps them visualize change; others  revise 
on screen. Above all, experiment. Save both
 the original and the 
 revised version; you can always go back to it restore the manuscript  
its  original condition. Remember
, It is no sign of weakness that your 
manuscript needs surgery. This is common in all writing, and among 
the best writers. (99 words)
And if we cut to the bone, we can reduce that in half:
 
Most writers revise because few write a perfect first draft. If you work 
on a computer, you can rearrange the parts by moving them around. 
If you save the original, you can always go back to it. Even great writ-
ers revise, so if your manuscript needs surgery, it signals no weak-
ness. (51 words)
But in boiling down that original paragraph to a quarter of its 
original length, I’ve bleached out its garrulous charm, a tradeoff 
that many readers would reject.
I can’t tell you when you’ve written so concisely that your 
readers think you are terse, even abrupt. That’s why you should 
listen to what readers say about your writing. They know what 
you never can: how it feels to be your reader.
in YoUr own words
Exercise 9.4
Revise a passage of your own writing as I did the passage from 
Strunk and White’s Elements of Style (pp. 139–140). Pick a long 
paragraph or section from your own writing (about 200 words). 
Now, shorten it to about 150 words, 100 words, 50 words. What do 
you gain or lose with each of these revisions?

 Lesson 9 Concision 141
Exercise 9.5
Every piece of writing needs some metadiscourse, but too much 
buries your ideas. Have a reader go through several pages of your 
writing and highlight all the metadiscourse. With your reader, ad-
dress the following questions: Which instances of metadiscourse 
are useful, and which are redundant or unnecessary? Are there 
places without metadiscourse where some would be helpful? Re-
vise as necessary.
sUMMing Up
You need more than concision to guarantee grace, but when you clear 
away deadwood, you can see the shape of a sentence more clearly.
  1. Meaningless words
 
Some polling sites reported various technical problems, but these 
did not really affect the election’s actual result.
✓ 
Some polling sites reported technical problems, but these did not 
affect the election’s result.
  2. Redundant pairs
 
If and when we can define our final aims and goals, each and ev-
ery member of our group will be ready and willing to offer aid and 
assistance.
✓ 
If we define our goals, we will all be ready to help.
  3. Redundant modifiers
 
In the business world of today, official governmental red tape seri-
ously destroys initiative among individual businesses.
✓ 
Government red tape destroys business initiative.
  4. Redundant categories
 
In the area of education, tight financial conditions are forcing 
school boards to cut nonessential expenses.
✓ 
Tight finances are forcing school boards to cut nonessentials.
  5. Obvious implications
 
Energy used to power industries and homes will in years to come 
cost more money.
✓ 
Energy will eventually cost more.

142 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
  6. A phrase for a word
 
A sail-powered craft that has turned on its side or completely over 
must remain buoyant enough so that it will bear the weight of 
those individuals who were aboard.
✓ 
A capsized sailboat must support those on it.
  7. Indirect negatives
 
There is no reason not to believe that engineering malfunctions in 
nuclear energy systems cannot be anticipated.
✓ 
Malfunctions in nuclear energy systems will surprise us.
  8. Excessive metadiscourse
 
It is almost certainly the case that totalitarian systems cannot 
allow a society to have what we would define as stable social 
relationships.
✓ 
Totalitarianism prevents stable social relationships.
  9. Hedges and intensifiers
The only principle here is the Goldilocks rule: not too much, 
not too little, but just right. That’s little help, but this is a matter 
where you have to develop and then trust your ear.
Too certain:In my research, I prove that people with a gun 
in their home use it to kill themselves or a fam-
ily member instead of to protect themselves 
from an intruder.
Too uncertain:Some of my recent research seems to  imply 
that there may be a risk that certain people 
with  a  gun  in  their  homes  could  be  more 
prone to use it to kill themselves or a  family 
member  than  to  protect  themselves  from  
 possible intruders.
Just right?My research indicates that people with a gun 
in their homes are more likely to use it to kill 
themselves or a family member than they are to 
protect themselves from an intruder.

143
Lesson 
10
Shape
The structure of every sentence is a lesson in logic.
—John STuarT mill
A long complicated sentence should force itself upon you,  
make you know yourself knowing it.
—GerTrude STein
You never know what is enough until you know what is more  
than enough.
—William blake
Understanding tHe sHape oF sentenCes
If you can write clear and concise sentences, you have achieved 
much. But a writer who can’t write a clear sentence longer than 
twenty words or so is like a composer who can write only jingles. 
Some advise against long sentences, but you cannot communicate 
every complex idea in a short one: you have to know how to write 
a sentence that is both long and clear.
Consider, for example, this sentence:
 
In addition to differences in ethnicity or religion that have for centu-
ries plagued Sunnis and Shiites, explanations of the causes of their 
distrust must include all of the other social, economic, and cultural 
conflicts that have plagued them that are rooted in a troubled history 
that extends 1,300 years into the past.

144 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Even if that idea needs all those fifty-two words (it doesn’t), they 
could be arranged into a more shapely sentence.
We  can  start  revising  by  editing  the  abstractions  into  
 characters/subjects and actions/verbs and then breaking the sen-
tence into shorter ones:
 Historians have tried to explain why Sunnis and Shiites distrust 
one another today. Many have claimed that the sources of conflict  
are age-old differences in religion. But they must also consider all the 
other social, economic, and cultural conflicts that have plagued their 
1,300 years of troubled history.
But that passage feels choppy. We prefer something like this:
✓ 
To explain why Sunnis and Shiites distrust one another today, 
historians must study not only age-old religious differences, but 
all the other social, economic, and cultural conflicts that have 
plagued their 1,300 years of troubled history.
That sentence is thirty-six words long, but it doesn’t sprawl. So it 
can’t be length alone that makes a sentence ungainly. In this les-
son, I focus on how to write sentences that are not only long and 
complex but also clear and shapely.
diagnosis and reVision: sprawl
As with other issues of style, you can see sprawl in the writing of 
others more easily than in your own, so you have to diagnose your 
prose in ways that sidestep your intractable subjectivity.
Start by picking out sentences longer than two lines and read-
ing them aloud. If in reading one of your long sentences you feel 
that you are about to run out of breath before you come to a place 
where you can pause to integrate all of its parts into a whole that 
communicates a single conceptual structure [breathe], you have 
found a sentence, like this one, that your readers would likely want 
you to revise. Or if your sentence, because of one  interruption 
 after another, seems to stop and start, your readers are, if they are 
typical, likely to judge that your sentence, as this one does, lurches 
from one part to the next.
Readers get a sense of shapeless length from three things:
• They have to wait too long to get to the verb in the main 
clause.
•	After the verb, they have to slog through a shapeless sprawl of 
tacked-on subordinate clauses.
•	They are stopped by one interruption after another.

 Lesson 10 Shape 145
Revising Long Openings
Some sentences seem to take forever to get started:
 1a. Since most undergraduate students change their fields of study 
at least once during their college careers, many more than once, 
 first-year students who are not certain about their program of 
 studies should not load up their schedules to meet requirements for a 
 particular  program.
That sentence takes thirty-one words to get to its main verb, 
should not load up. Here are two rules of thumb about beginning a 
sentence: (1) Get to the subject of the main clause quickly. (2) Get 
to the verb and object quickly.
Rule of Thumb 1: Get to the subject quickly. We have a 
problem with sentences that open with long introductory phrases 
and clauses, because as we read them, we have to keep in mind 
that the subject and verb of a main clause are still to come, and 
that load on our memory hinders easy understanding. So avoid 
beginning more than a few sentences with long introductory 
phrases and clauses.
Compare these next examples. In (1b) we have to read and 
understand seventeen words before reading the main subject and 
verb. In (1c), we get past the subject and verb of the first clause in 
just three words:
     1b.     Since most undergraduate students change their major fields 
of study at least once during their college careers, first-year stu-
dents who are not certain about the program of studies they want to 
pursue 
Should noT load uP their schedules to meet requirements for 
a particular program.
✓
  1c.  First-year students Should noT load uP their schedules with 
 requirements for a particular program if they are not certain 
about the program of studies they want to pursue, because most 
chanGe their major fields of study at least once during their col-
lege careers.
When you find a sentence with a very long introductory clause, 
try moving it to the end. If it doesn’t fit there, try turning it into a 
sentence of its own.
It is, however, a fact of English style that clauses beginning 
with if, since, when, and although tend to appear before main 
clauses rather than after. So if you cannot avoid opening with a 
subordinate clause, keep it short.
An exception: In a style called “periodic” or “suspended,” 
 writers deliberately pile up introductory subordinate clauses 

146 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
to  delay and thereby heighten the impact of a concluding main 
clause:
 
When a society spends more on its pets than it does on its homeless, 
when it rewards those who hit a ball the farthest more highly than  
     those who care most deeply for its neediest, 
 when it takes more interest in the juvenile behavior of its richest  
     children than in the deficient education of its poorest,
 it has lost its moral center.
Used sparingly, this kind of sentence can have a dramatic impact, 
especially when the last few words of the last clause are appropri-
ately stressed. We discuss this matter again in Lesson 11.
Rule of Thumb 2: Get to the verb and object quickly.    Readers    
also want to get past the main subject to its verb and object. Therefore,
• Avoid long, abstract subjects.
•	Avoid interrupting the subject-verb connection.
•	Avoid interrupting the verb-object connection.
Avoid long, abstract subjects. Revise long subjects into short 
ones. Start by underlining whole subjects. If you find a subject 
longer than seven or eight words that includes a nominalization, 
try turning the nominalization into a verb and finding a subject 
for it:
 
Abco Inc.’s understanding of the drivers of its profitability in the 
Asian market for small electronics helped it pursue opportunities 
in Africa.
✓ 
Abco Inc. was able to pursue opportunities in Africa because it 
understood what drove profitability in the Asian market for small 
electronics.
A subject can also be long if it includes a long relaTive clauSe:
 
A company that focuses on hiring the best personnel and then 
trains them not just for the work they are hired to do but for 
higher-level jobs 
iS likely to earn the loyalty of its employees.
Try turning the relative clause into an introductory subordinate 
clause beginning with when or if:
✓ 
When a company focuses on hiring the best personnel and then 
trains them not just for the work they are hired to do but for 
higher-level jobs, it is likely to earn the loyalty of its employees.
But if the introductory clause turns out to be as long as that one, 
try moving it to the end of its sentence, especially if (1) the main 

 Lesson 10 Shape 147
clause is short and expresses the point of the sentence and (2) the 
moveable clause expresses newer and more complex information 
that supports or elaborates on the main clause.
✓ 
A company is likely to earn the loyalty of its employees when it 
 focuses on hiring the best personnel and then trains them not 
just for the work they are hired to do but for higher-level jobs.
Or better yet, perhaps, turn it into a sentence of its own:
✓ 
Some companies focus on hiring the best personnel and then train 
them not just for the work they are hired to do but for higher-level 
jobs later. Such companies are likely to earn the loyalty of their 
employees.
Avoid interrupting the subject-verb connection. You frus-
trate readers when you interrupt the connection between a subject 
and verb, like this:
 
Some scientists, because they write in a style that is impersonal 
and objective, do not easily communicate with laypeople.
That because clause after the subject forces us to hold our mental 
breath until we reach the verb, do not easily communicate. Move 
the interruption to the beginning or end of its sentence, depending 
on whether it connects more closely to what precedes or follows it 
(note the since instead of because).
✓ 
Since some scientists write in a style that is impersonal and objective, 
they do not easily communicate with laypeople. This lack of com-
munication damages . . .
✓ 
Some scientists do not easily communicate with laypeople because 
they write in a style that is impersonal and objective. It is a kind 
of style filled with passives and . . .
We mind short interruptions less:
✓ 
Some scientists deliberately write in a style that is impersonal and 
objective.
Avoid interrupting the verb-object connection. We also like 
to get past the verb to its object quickly. This sentence doesn’t let 
us do that:
 
We must develop, if we are to become competitive with other 
companies in our region, a core of knowledge regarding the state of 
the art in effective industrial organizations.
Move the interrupting element to the beginning or end of its 
 sentence, depending on what comes next:

148 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
✓ 
If we are to compete with other companies in our region, we 
must develop a core of knowledge about the state of the art in effec-
tive industrial organizations. Such organizations provide . . .
✓ 
We must develop a core of knowledge about the state of the art in 
effective industrial organizations if we are to compete with other 
companies in our region. Increasing competition . . .
An exception: When a prepositional phrase you can move is 
shorter than a long object, try putting the phrase between the verb 
and object:
 
In a long sentence, put the newest and most important information 
that you want your reader to remember at its end.
✓ 
In a long sentence, put at its end the newest and most important 
 information that you want your reader to remember.
Here’s the point: Readers read most easily when you 
quickly get them to the subject of your main clause and then 
past that subject to its verb and object. Avoid long introduc-
tory phrases and clauses, long subjects, and interruptions be-
tween subjects and verbs and between verbs and objects.
anotHer prinCiple: starting  
witH yoUr point
We can add another principle, one that applies to long sentences 
in particular. Compare these two:
 
High-deductible health plans and Health Saving Accounts into which 
workers and their employers make tax-deductible deposits result in 
workers taking more responsibility for their health care.
✓
 Workers take more responsibility for their health care when they 
adopt high-deductible insurance plans and Health Saving  Accounts 
into  which  they  and  their  employers  deposit  tax-deductible  
contributions.
Unlike that lumbering first sentence, the second begins not with 
a long, abstract subject but with a short, concrete one familiar to 
readers, directly followed by a verb stating a specific action: Work-
ers take . . . .

 Lesson 10 Shape 149
But it differs in another way too. In that first sentence, we 
have to read more than twenty words before we see their relevance 
to its key claim, to its most important point: that workers take re-
sponsibility for their health care. The sentence feels backward. We 
can’t see the relevance of its beginning until we reach its end.
 
[High-deductible health plans and Health Saving Accounts into which 
workers and their employers make tax-deductible deposits]
explanation/
support
 [result in workers taking more responsibility for their health 
care.]
point
In contrast, the second sentence opens with an eight-word 
main clause stating its most important point clearly and concisely:
✓
 [Workers take more responsibility for their health care]
point
 [when 
they adopt high-deductible insurance plans and Health Saving 
 Accounts into which they and their employers make tax-deductible 
deposits.]
explanation/support
When we read its point first, we can anticipate the relevance of the 
next nineteen words even before we read them.
Here is a very general principle about how we read: we can 
best manage complexity when we begin with something short and 
direct that frames the more complex information that follows. We 
have seen how that principle applies to individual subjects and 
verbs. But it also applies to the logical elements of a long sentence, 
to its point and to its explanation or supporting information. 
When a point is dribbled out or delayed, we have to reconstruct 
it, then mentally reassemble the sentence into its logical parts. A 
point clearly stated up front gives us a context to understand the 
complexity that follows.
To diagnose a long sentence, look first for its point, the key 
claim that you want readers to grasp quickly. If you find it in the 
middle of its sentence or at its end, revise: state it in a short, sim-
ple main clause at the beginning. Then add to it the longer, more 
complex information that supports or explains it. (See p. 145–146, 
however, for a competing principle.)
In fact, this principle of simple-before-complex applies to even 
larger units:
• Begin a paragraph with a sentence (or two) expressing its point 
so that readers can understand what follows (see pp. 119–120).
•	Begin a section of a document with a paragraph or two stating 
its point (see pp. 114–115).

150 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
•	Do the same for a whole document: begin with an  introduction 
that states its point and frames the rest (see pp. 99–108).
Sentence, paragraph, section, or whole—how quickly,  concisely, 
and helpfully you begin determines how easily your readers under-
stand what follows.
Exercise 10.1
These sentences have long subjects. Revise.
 1. Explaining why Shakespeare decided to have Lady Macbeth die 
off stage rather than letting the audience see her die has to 
do with understanding the audience’s reactions to Macbeth’s 
death.
 2. An agreement by the film industry and by television producers 
on limiting characters using cigarettes, even if carried out, would 
do little to discourage young people from smoking.
 3. A student’s right to have access to his or her own records, in-
cluding medical records, academic reports, and confidential 
comments by advisers, will generally take precedence over an in-
stitution’s desire to keep records private, except when limitations 
of those rights under specified circumstances are agreed to by 
students during registration.
These sentences are interrupted. First, eliminate wordiness, then 
correct the interruption.
 4. The construction of the Interstate Highway System, owing to 
the fact that Congress, on the occasion when it originally voted 
funds for it, did not anticipate the rising cost of inflation, ran 
into serious financial problems.
 5. Such prejudicial conduct or behavior, regardless of the  reasons 
offered  to  justify  it,  is  rarely  not  at  least  to  some  degree  
 prejudicial to good order and discipline.
 6. TV  “reality”  shows,  because  they  have  an  appeal  to  our  
 fascination with real-life conflict because of our voyeuristic 
 impulses, are about the most popular shows that are regularly 
scheduled to appear on TV.
 7. Insistence that there is no proof by scientific means of a causal 
link between tobacco consumption and various disease entities 
such as cardiac heart diseases and malignant growth, despite the 
fact that there is a strong statistical correlation between  smoking 
behavior and such diseases, is no longer the officially stated 
 position of cigarette companies.

 Lesson 10    Shape 151
Reshaping spRawl
When we see the point of a sentence first, we can slog through 
whatever sprawling mess might follow. But we will wish we didn’t 
have to. This next sentence begins with a clearly stated point, but 
then sprawls through a string of four explanatory subordinate 
clauses:
 
No scientific advance is more exciting than genetic engineering,
point
 
which is a new way of manipulating the elemental structural units 
of life itself, which are the genes and chromosomes that tell our 
cells how to reproduce to become the parts that constitute our 
bodies.
explanation
 8. The continued and unabated emission of carbon dioxide gas into 
the atmosphere, unless there is a marked reduction, will eventu-
ally result in serious changes in the climate of the world as we 
know it today.
These sentences have long introductory phrases and clauses.  
Revise. 
Try to open your revised sentence with its point.
 9. While grade inflation has been a subject of debate by teachers 
and administrators and even in newspapers, employers looking 
for people with high levels of technical and analytical skills have 
not had difficulty identifying desirable candidates.
 10. Although one way to prevent foreign piracy of DVDs is for 
criminal justice systems of foreign countries to move cases 
faster  through  their  systems  and  for  stiffer  penalties  to   
be imposed, no improvement in the level of expertise of judges 
who hear these cases is expected any time in the immediate 
future.
 11. Since school officials responsible for setting policy about school 
security have said that local principals may require students to 
pass through metal detectors before entering a school building, 
the need to educate parents and students about the serious-
ness of bringing onto school property anything that looks like 
a weapon must be made a part of the total package of school 
security.
 12. If the music industry ignores the problem of how a rating system 
applied to offensive lyrics could be applied to music broadcast 
over FM and AM radio, then even if it were willing to discuss a 
system that could be used in the sale of music in retail stores, the 
likelihood of any significant improvement in its image with the 
public is nil.

152 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Graphically, it looks like this:
 
No scientific advance is more exciting than genetic engineering, 
[point and subject-verb core]
 
which is a new way of manipulating the elemental structural units 
of life itself, [tacked-on relative clause]
 
which are the genes and chromosomes [tacked-on relative 
clause]
 
that tell our cells how to reproduce to become the parts 
[tacked-on relative clause]
 
that constitute our bodies. [final tacked-on relative clause]
Diagnose this problem by having someone read your prose 
aloud. If that reader hesitates, stumbles over words, or runs out of 
breath before getting to the end of a sentence, so will your silent 
reader. You can revise in four ways: cut, turn subordinate clauses 
into independent sentences, change clauses to modifying phrases, 
or coordinate.
1. Cut.
Try reducing some of the relative clauses to phrases by deleting 
who/that/which + is/was, etc.:
✓ 
Of the many areas of science important to our future, few are more 
promising than genetic engineering, which is
 a new way of manipu-
lating the elemental structural units of life itself, which are
 the genes 
and chromosomes that tell our cells how to reproduce to become the 
parts that constitute our bodies.
Occasionally, you have to rewrite the remaining verb into an 
-ing form:
 
The day is coming when we will all have numbers that will identify 
our financial transactions so that the IRS can monitor all activities 
that involve economic activity.
Quick Tip:   If you are confused by a sprawling sen-
tence when you read, focus on the relative pronouns who, 
which, and that. Pause a moment to figure out what each one 
 refers to. Then reread the sentence, substituting nouns for 
the  pronouns. That should unravel the sentence.

 Lesson 10 Shape 153
✓ 
The day is coming when we will all have numbers that will identify-
ing our financial transactions so that the IRS can monitor all activi-
ties that involving economic activity.
2.     Turn subordinate clauses into independent 
sentences.
✓ 
Many areas of science are important to our future, but few are more 
promising than genetic engineering. It is a new way of manipulat-
ing the elemental structural units of life itself, the genes and chromo-
somes that tell our cells how to reproduce to become the parts that 
constitute our bodies.
3. Change clauses to modifying phrases.
You can write a long sentence but still avoid sprawl if you change 
relative clauses to one of three kinds of modifying phrases: 
 resumptive, summative, or free. You have probably never heard 
these terms before, but they name stylistic devices you have read 
many times and so should know how to use.
Resumptive Modifiers These two examples contrast a relative 
clause and a reSumPTive modifier:
 
Since mature writers often use resumptive modifiers to extend a line 
of thought, we need a word to name what I have not done in this sen-
tence, which I could have ended at that comma but extended to 
show you a relative clause attached to a noun.
✓ 
Since mature writers often use resumptive modifiers to extend a line 
of thought, we need a word to name what I am about to do in this 
sentence, a sentence that I could have ended at that comma but 
extended to show you how resumptive modifiers work.
The boldface resumptive modifier repeats a key word, sentence, 
and rolls on.
To create a resumptive modifier, find the noun the tacked-on  
clause modifies, pause after it with a comma, repeat the noun, 
and continue with a restrictive relative clause beginning with that:
 
Since mature writers often use resumptive modifiers to extend a line 
of thought, we need a word to name what I am about to do in this 
sentence,
                 a sentence that I could have ended at that comma, but 
 extended to show you how resumptive modifiers work.

154 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
You can also resume with an adjective or verb. In that case, 
you don’t add a relative clause; you just repeat the adjective or 
verb and continue:
✓ 
It was American writers who found a voice that was both true and 
lyrical,
                 true to the rhythms of the working man’s speech and lyrical in 
its celebration of his labor.
✓ 
All who value independence should resist the trivialization of 
 government  regulation,
                 resist its obsession with administrative tidiness and compulsion 
to arrange things not for our convenience but for theirs.
Occasionally, you can create a resumptive modifier with the 
phrase one that:
✓
 I now address a problem we have wholly ignored, one that has 
plagued societies that sell their natural resources to benefit a 
few today rather than using them to develop new resources 
that benefit everyone tomorrow.
Summative Modifiers Here are two sentences that contrast 
relative clauses and SummaTive modifierS. Notice how the which in 
the first one feels “tacked on”:
 
Economic changes have reduced Russian population growth to less 
than zero, which will have serious social implications.
✓ 
Economic changes have reduced Russian population growth to less 
than zero, a demographic event that will have serious social 
implications.
To create a summative modifier, end a grammatically complete 
segment of a sentence with a comma, add a term that sums up the 
substance of the sentence so far, and continue with a restrictive 
relative clause beginning with that:
 
Economic changes have reduced Russian population growth to less 
than zero,
              
a demographic  event  that  will  have  serious  social  
implications.
A summative modifier has the same effect as a resumptive modifier: 
it lets you bring a clause to a sense of closure, then begin afresh.
Free Modifiers Like the other modifiers, a 
free modifier can 
appear at the end of a clause, but instead of repeating a key word 

 Lesson 10 Shape 155
or summing up what went before, it comments on the subject of 
the closest verb:
✓ 
Free modifiers resemble resumptive and summative modifiers, 
 letting you [i.e., the free modifier lets you] extend the line of a 
 sentence while avoiding a train of ungainly phrases and clauses.
Free modifiers usually begin with an -ing PreSenT ParTiciPle, as 
those did, but they can also begin with a past participle verb, like 
this:
✓ 
Leonardo da Vinci was a man of powerful intellect,
 driven by [i.e., Leonardo was driven by] an insatiable curiosity and 
haunted by a vision of artistic perfection.
A free modifier can also begin with an adjective:
✓ 
In 1939, we began to assist the British against Germany,
          aware [i.e., we were aware] that we faced another world war.
We call these modifiers free because they can either begin or end 
a sentence:
✓ 
Driven by an insatiable curiosity, Leonardo da Vinci was . . .
✓ 
Aware that we faced another world war, in 1939 we began . . .
Here’s the point: When you have to write a long sentence, 
don’t just add one phrase or clause after another, willy-nilly. 
Particularly avoid tacking one relative clause onto another 
onto another. Try extending the line of a sentence with 
 resumptive, summative, and free modifiers.
Quick Tip:   Some long introductory clauses can eas-
ily be converted into independent clauses. The easiest is an 
although clause. Drop the although and begin the following 
clause with but or however:
 Although some writers write well on their own, without the 
help of direct teaching or models of good prose, most benefit 
from instruction in the basics of writing graceful sentences.
✓ 
Some writers write well on their own, without the help of 
direct teaching or models of good prose, but most benefit 
from instruction in the basics of writing graceful sentences.

156 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
4. Coordinate
coordinaTion is the foundation of a gracefully shaped sentence. 
It’s harder to create good coordination than good modifiers, but 
when done well, it’s more graceful. Compare these. My version is 
first; the original is second:
 
The aspiring artist may find that even a minor, unfinished work  
which was botched may be an instructive model for how things 
should be done, while for the amateur spectator, such works are 
the daily fare which may provide good, honest nourishment, which 
can lead to an appreciation of deeper pleasures that are also more 
refined.
✓ 
For the aspiring artist, the minor, the unfinished, or even the botched 
work, may be an instructive model for how things should—and 
should not—be done. For the amateur spectator, such works are the 
daily fare which provide good, honest nourishment—and which can 
lead to appreciation of more refined, or deeper pleasures.
—Eva Hoffman, “Minor Art Offers Special Pleasures”
My revision sprawls through a string of tacked-on clauses.
The aspiring artist may find that even a minor, unfinished work
 which was botched may be an instructive model for
        how things should be done,
            while for the amateur spectator, such works are the daily fare
                which may provide good, honest nourishment,
                    which can lead to an appreciation of deeper pleasures
                        that are also more refined.
Another easy one is a since clause. Drop the since and begin the  
next clause with so, therefore, as a result, or some other such 
connector.
 Since few writers write well on their own, without the help 
of direct teaching or models of good prose, most first-year 
college students would benefit from a course in composition.
✓ 
Few writers write well on their own, without the help of 
 direct teaching or models of good prose, so most first-year 
college students would benefit from a course in composition.

 Lesson 10 Shape 157
Hoffman’s original gets its shape from its multiple coordinations. 
Structurally, it looks like this:
an instructive 
model for how things
which can 
lead to 
appreciation
of
 the minor,
 the un
nished,
 or
 even the botched
For the aspiring artist,
work may be
 which provide
the daily fare
good,
honest
For the amateur spectator, such works are
should
 and
should not
be done.
and
more re
ned,
 or
deeper
nourishment—
pleasures.
That  second  sentence  in  particular  shows  how  elaborate  
 coordination can get.
a general design prinCiple: sHort to long
We should note a feature that distinguishes well-formed coordina-
tion. You can hear it if you read this next sentence aloud:
 
We should devote a few final words to a matter that reaches beyond 
the techniques of research to the connections between those subjective 
values that reflect our deepest ethical choices and objective research.
That sentence seems to end too abruptly with objective research. 
Structurally, it looks like this:
those subjective values that reect our 
deepest ethical choices
            and
objective research.
. . . between

158 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
This next revision moves from shorter to longer by reversing the 
two coordinate elements and by adding a parallelism to the  second 
one to make it longer still. Read this one aloud:
✓ 
We should devote a few final words to a matter that reaches beyond 
the techniques of research to the connections between objective 
 research and those subjective values that reflect our deepest ethical 
choices and strongest intellectual commitments.
Structurally, it looks like this:
deepest ethical choices
               and
strongest intellectual 
commitments.
 . . . between
objective research
         and
those subjective
values that re	ect our
A characteristic of especially elegant prose is how its writers elab-
orate all these devices for extending the line of a sentence, espe-
cially balanced coordination. I will discuss those devices and their 
elaboration in Lesson 11.
A Unifying Principle
This principle of short-to-long is, in fact, one of the unifying prin-
ciples of a clear prose style:
• It applies to the subject-verb sequence of individual sentences: 
the shorter the better to introduce the longer, more complex 
elements that follow.
•	It applies to the principle of old-new: old information is 
 usually objectively shorter than new information, but it  
is “psychologically” shorter, as well.
•	It applies to ordering the logical elements of a long sentence: 
begin with its short point, then add the longer and more 
 complex information that explains or supports it.
•	It applies again here in balanced coordination: put shorter 
 elements before longer ones.

 Lesson 10 Shape 159
Here’s the point: Coordination lets you extend the line of 
a sentence more gracefully than by tacking on one element to 
another. When you can coordinate, try to order the elements 
so that they go from shorter to longer, from simpler to more 
complex.
Quick Tip:   You can emphasize a coordination with 
correlaTive conJuncTionS: both X and Y, not only X but Y,  
(n)either X (n)or Y. Compare these:
✓ Great Britain is a good trading partner and a reliable ally in 
the war against terrorism.
✓
 
Great Britain is both a good trading partner and a reliable 
ally in the war against terrorism.
When you use one of these conjunctions, however, be sure 
to put the and, but, or (n)or before a word that is coordinate 
with what follows the both, not only, and (n)either. In the 
first sentence below, not only precedes the verb while the but 
precedes its subject:
 When you punctuate carefully, you not only help readers un-
derstand a complex sentence more easily, but you enhance 
your own image as a good writer.
They should precede the same part of speech:
✓ When you punctuate carefully, you not only help readers 
understand a complex sentence more easily, but enhance 
your own image as a good writer.
Exercise 10.2
Edit these sentences to address redundancy, wordiness, nominal-
izations, and other problems. Then create resumptive, summative, 
and free modifiers. In the first four, start a resumptive modifier 
with the word in boldface. Then use the word in brackets to create 
another sentence with a summative modifier. For example:
Within ten years, we could meet our energy needs with solar power. 
[a possibility]

160 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Resumptive:
✓ 
Within ten years, we could meet our energy needs with solar power, 
needs that will soar as our population grows.
Summative:
✓ 
Within ten years, we could meet our energy needs with solar power,  
a possibility that few anticipated ten years ago.
Free:
✓ 
Within ten years, we could meet our energy needs with solar power, 
freeing ourselves of dependence on foreign oil.
But before you begin adding modifiers, edit these sentences for 
 redundancy, wordiness, nominalizations, and other problems.
  1. Many different school systems are making a return back to 
 traditional education in the basics. [a change]
  2.  Within the period of the last few years or so, automobile manu-
facturers have been trying to meet new and more stringent-type 
quality control requirements. [a challenge]
  3.  The  reasons  for  the  cause  of  aging  are  a  puzzle  that  has  
 perplexed humanity for millennia. [a mystery]
  4.  The majority of young people in the world of today cannot even 
begin to have an understanding of the insecurity that a large 
number of older people had experienced during the period of 
the Great Depression. [a failure]
  5.  Many who lived during the period of the Victorian era were 
 appalled when Darwin put forth the suggestion that their 
 ancestry might have included creatures related to apes.
  6.  In the period known to scholars and historians as the  Renaissance, 
increases in affluence and stability in the area of political affairs 
had the consequence of allowing streams of thought of  different 
kinds to merge and flow together.
  7.  The field of journalism has to an increasing degree placed its 
 focus on the kind of news stories and events that at one time in 
our history were considered to be only gossip of a salacious and 
sexual nature.
troUblesHooting long sentenCes
Even when you manage their internal structures, long sentences 
can still go wrong.
Faulty Grammatical Coordination
Ordinarily, we coordinate elements only of the same gram-
matical structure: clause and clause, prepositional phrase and 

 Lesson 10 Shape 161
prepositional phrase, and so on. When you coordinate different 
grammatical structures, readers may feel you have created an of-
fensive lack of ParalleliSm. Careful writers avoid this:
The committee 
recommends
revising the curriculum to recognize
trends in local employment
                             and
that the division be reorganized to
reect the new curriculum.   
They would correct that to this:
. . . recommends            
that the curriculum be revised 
to recognize . . .
                       and
that the division be reorganized 
to reect. . . .
Or to this:
. . . recommends            
revising the curriculum 
to recognize . . .
                 and
reorganizing the division 
to reect. . . .
However, some nonparallel coordinations do occur in well-
written prose. Careful writers coordinate a noun phrase with a 
how clause:
 We will attempt to delineate 
the problems of education 
in developing nations
                    and
how coordinated efforts 
can address them in 
economical ways.

162 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
They coordinate an adverb with a prepositional phrase:
 The proposal appears 
    to have been written
quickly,
carefully,
    and
with the help of many.
Careful readers do not blink at either.
Faulty Rhetorical Coordination
We respond to coordination best when the elements are coordi-
nate not only in grammar but also in thought. Some inexperi-
enced writers coordinate by just joining one element to another 
with and:
 
Grade inflation is a problem at many universities, and it leads to 
a devaluation of good grades earned by hard work and will not be 
solved simply by grading harder.
Those ands obscure the relationships among those claims:
✓
 
Grade inflation is a problem at many universities, because it deval-
ues good grades that were earned by hard work, but it will not be 
solved simply by grading harder.
Unfortunately, I can’t tell you how to recognize when elements are 
not coordinate in thought, except to say, “Watch for it.” Which, of 
course, is like someone telling a batter to “hit the ball squarely.” 
We know that. What we don’t know is how.
Unclear Connections
Readers are bothered by a coordination so long that they lose 
track of its internal connections and pronoun references:
 
Teachers  should  remember  that  students  are  vulnerable  and  
 uncertain about those everyday ego-bruising moments that adults 
 ignore and that they do not understand that one day they will become 
as confident and as secure as the adults that bruise them.
We sense a flicker of hesitation about where to connect:
 
. . . and that they do not understand that one day they . . .
To revise a sentence like that, shorten the first half of the coor-
dination so that you can start the second half closer to the point 
where the coordination began:

 Lesson 10 Shape 163
✓ 
Teachers should remember that students are vulnerable to ego- 
bruising moments that adults ignore and that they do not understand 
that one day . . .
Or repeat a word that reminds the reader where the  coordination 
began (thereby creating a resumptive modifier):
✓ 
Teachers  should  remember  that  students  are  vulnerable  to  
 ego- bruising moments that adults ignore, to remember that they do 
not understand that . . .
Or repeat a noun to avoid an ambiguous pronoun:
✓ 
Teachers  should  remember  that  students  are  vulnerable  to  
 ego-bruising moments that adults ignore and that students do not 
understand that one day . . .
Ambiguous Modifiers
Another problem with modifiers is that sometimes readers are un-
sure what they modify:
 
Overtaxing oneself in physical activity too frequently results in injury.
What happens too frequently, overtaxing or injuries? We can make 
its meaning unambiguous by moving too frequently:
✓ 
Overtaxing oneself too frequently in physical activity results in injury.
✓ 
Overtaxing oneself in physical activity results too frequently in injury.
A modifier at the end of a clause can ambiguously modify 
 either a neighboring or a more distant phrase:
 
Scientists have learned that their observations are as subjective as 
those in any other field in recent years.
We can move the modifier to a less ambiguous position:
✓ 
In recent years, scientists have learned that . . .
✓ 
Scientists have learned that in recent years their . . .
Dangling Modifiers
Another problem with a long sentence can be a danGlinG modi-
fier. A modifier dangles when its implied subject differs from the 
 explicit subject of the main clause:
 
To overcome chronic poverty and lagging economic development 
in sub-Saharan Africa,
dangling modifier
 a commitment to health and 
 education
whole subject
 is necessary for there to be progress in raising 
standards of living.

164 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
The implied subject of overcome is some unnamed agent, but the 
explicit subject of the main clause is commitment. To undangle 
the modifier, we make its implicit subject explicit:
✓
 If developed countries are to overcome chronic poverty and lag-
ging economic development in sub-Saharan Africa, a commitment to 
health and education is necessary . . .
Or better, make the implicit subject of the modifier the explicit 
subject of the clause:
✓
 To overcome chronic poverty and lagging economic development in sub-
Saharan Africa, developed countries must commit themselves to .  .  .
in yoUr own words
Exercise 10.3
Two rules of thumb for beginning sentences are (1) get to the sub-
ject quickly and (2) get to the verb and object quickly (see pp. 145–
146). Go through a page of your writing and underline the first 
7 or 8 words of every sentence. Revise those in which you do not 
come to the subject and the verb in those first 7 or 8 words.
Exercise 10.4
It is difficult for writers to identify their bad habits, because they 
know their own writing too well. So have a reader help you iden-
tify yours:
 
•	Do you take too long to get to your subjects and verbs?
 
•	Are your subjects too long?
 
•	Do you interrupt the connection between subject and verb, or 
verb and object?
 
•	Do you take too long to make your point (in sentences and in 
passages)?
 
•	Do you add subordinate clause to subordinate clause to subor-
dinate clause?
Have a reader go through a few pages of your writing and draw 
a line beside any passages that seemed unclear or difficult to get 
through, naming the cause of the difficulty if she can. If she can’t, 
diagnose the rough passages together. (You can trust a reader’s 
judgment that something is amiss, even if that reader can’t say 
 exactly what.) Then revise.

 Lesson 10 Shape 165
sUmming Up
Here are the principles for giving sentences a coherent shape:
  1. Get quickly to the subject, then to the verb and its object:
a. Avoid long introductory phrases and clauses. Revise them 
into their own independent clauses:
 
Since most undergraduate students change their major fields 
of study at least once during their college careers, many more 
than once, first-year students who are not certain about 
the program of studies they want to pursue should not load  
up their schedules to meet requirements for a particular 
program.
✓ 
Most undergraduate students change their major fields of 
study at least once during their college careers, so first-year 
students should not load up their schedules with requirements 
for a particular program if they are not certain about the pro-
gram of studies they want to pursue.
b. Avoid long subjects. Revise a long subject into an introduc-
tory subordinate clause:
 
A company that focuses on hiring the best personnel and 
then trains them not just for the work they are hired to 
do but for higher-level jobs is likely to earn the loyalty of its 
employees.
✓ 
When a company focuses on hiring the best personnel and 
then trains them not just for the work they are hired to do 
but for higher-level jobs later, it is likely to earn the loyalty of 
its employees.
If the new introductory clause is long, shift it to the end of 
its sentence:
✓ 
A company is likely to earn the loyalty of its employees when it 
focuses on hiring the best personnel . . .
Or just break it out in a sentence of its own:
✓ 
Some companies focus on hiring the best personnel and 
then train them not just for the work they are hired to do 
but for higher-level jobs later. Such companies are likely to 
earn the loyalty of their employees.
c. Avoid  interrupting  subjects  and  verbs,  and  verbs  and  
  objects.  Move  the  interrupting  element  to  either  the  
 beginning or end of the sentence, depending on what  
the next sentence is about:

166 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
 
Some scientists, because they write in a style that is im-
personal and objective, do not easily communicate with 
laypeople.
✓ 
Because some scientists write in a style that is impersonal 
and objective, they do not easily communicate with laypeople. 
This lack of communication damages . . .
✓ 
Some scientists do not easily communicate with laypeople 
 because they write in a style that is impersonal and  objective. 
It is a kind of style filled with passives. . .
  2. Open the sentence with its point in a short main clause stating 
the key claim that you want the sentence to make:
 
A new sales initiative that has created a close integration between 
the garden and home products departments has made significant 
improvements to the customer services that Acme offers.
✓ 
Acme has significantly improved its customer services with a new 
sales initiative that closely integrates the garden and home prod-
ucts departments.
  3.    After the main clause, avoid adding one subordinate clause to 
another to another to another:
a. Trim relative clauses and break the sentences into two:
 
Of the many areas of science that are important to our future, few 
are more promising than genetic engineering, which is a new way 
of manipulating the elemental structural units of life itself, which 
are the genes and chromosomes that tell our cells how to repro-
duce to become the parts that constitute our bodies.
✓ 
Many areas of science are important to our future, but few are 
more promising than genetic engineering. It is a new way of 
 manipulating the elemental structural units of life itself, which 
are the genes and chromosomes that tell our cells how to repro-
duce to become the parts that constitute our bodies.
✓ 
Of the many areas of science that are important to our future, few 
are more promising than genetic engineering, which is
 a new way 
of manipulating the elemental structural units of life itself, which 
are the genes and chromosomes that tell our cells how to repro-
duce to become the parts that
 constituting our bodies.
b. Extend a sentence with resumptive, summative, or free 
modifiers:
✓ 
Resumptive:       When we discovered the earth was not the  center 
of the universe, it changed our understanding  
of  who  we  are,  an  understanding  changed  
again by Darwin, again by Freud, and again by 
Einstein.

 Lesson 10 Shape 167
✓ 
Summative:      American productivity has risen to new heights, 
an achievement that only a decade ago was 
considered an impossible dream.
✓ 
Free:                      Global  warming  will  become  a  central    political  
 issue of the twenty-first century, raising ques-
tions whose answers will affect the standard 
of  living in every Western nation.
c. Coordinate elements that are Parallel both in grammar 
and in sense:
 
Besides the fact that no civilization has experienced such rapid 
alterations in their spiritual and mental lives, the material con-
ditions of their daily existence have changed greatly too.
✓ 
No civilization has experienced such rapid alterations in their 
spiritual and mental lives and in the material conditions of 
daily existence.
A last note: to write a long complex sentence that is also clear, 
you may need punctuation to help your reader through it. See 
 Appendix  I.

168
Anything is better than not to write clearly. There is nothing to be 
said against lucidity, and against simplicity only the possibility of 
dryness. This is a risk well worth taking when you reflect how much 
better it is to be bald than to wear a curly wig.
—SomerSet maugham
Read over your compositions, and wherever you meet with a 
passage which you think is particularly fine, strike it out.
—Samuel JohnSon
In literature the ambition of the novice is to acquire the literary 
language; the struggle of the adept is to get rid of it.
—george Bernard Shaw
Understanding elegance
Anyone who can write clearly, concisely, and coherently should 
 rejoice to achieve so much. But while most readers prefer bald 
clarity to the density of institutional prose, relentless simplic-
ity can be dry, even arid. It has the spartan virtue of unsalted 
meat and potatoes, but such fare is rarely memorable. A flash of 
 elegance, however, can not only fix a thought in our minds, but 
give us a flicker of pleasure every time we recall it. Unfortunately, 
Lesson 
11
Elegance

 Lesson 11 Elegance 169
I can’t tell you how to do that. In fact, I incline toward those who 
think that the most elegant elegance is disarming simplicity.
Nevertheless, there are a few devices that can shape a thought 
in ways that are both elegant and clear. Just knowing them, how-
ever, won’t let you write elegantly, any more than just knowing the 
ingredients in a delicious bouillabaisse will let you cook it. The 
ability to write with elegant clarity may be a gift. But even a gift 
has to be educated and exercised.
Balance and Symmetry
What most makes a sentence graceful is a balance and symmetry 
among its parts, one echoing another in sound, rhythm, structure, 
and meaning. A skilled writer can balance almost any parts of a 
sentence, but the most common balance is based on coordination.
Balanced Coordination Here is a balanced passage and my 
revision of it. A tin ear can distinguish them:
 The national unity of a free people depends upon a sufficiently even 
balance of political power to make it impracticable for the admin-
istration to be arbitrary and for the opposition to be revolutionary 
and irreconcilable. Where that balance no longer exists, democracy 
perishes. For unless all the citizens of a state are forced by circum-
stances to compromise, unless they feel that they can affect policy 
but that no one can wholly dominate it, unless by habit and necessity 
they have to give and take, freedom cannot be maintained.
—Walter Lippmann
 
The national unity of a free people depends upon a sufficiently even 
balance of political power to make it impracticable for an admin-
istration to be arbitrary against a revolutionary opposition that is 
 irreconcilably opposed to it. Where that balance no longer exists, 
 democracy perishes, because unless all the citizens of a state are 
 habitually forced by necessary circumstances to compromise in a 
way that lets them affect policy with no one dominating it, freedom 
cannot be maintained.
My sentences lurch from one part to the next. In Lippmann’s, we 
hear one clause and phrase echo another in word order, sound, 
and meaning, giving the whole passage an intricate architectural 
symmetry.
We can apply the principle of topic and stress not only to 
whole sentences but also to their parts. If we do that here, we see 
how Lippmann balances even short segments. Note how each 

170 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
 significant word in one phrase echoes another in its correspond-
ing phrase (I boldface topics of phrases and italicize stresses):
 
The national unity of a free people depends upon a sufficiently even 
balance of political power to make it impracticable
for the administration to be arbitrary
 
                 and
revolutionary
    and
irreconcilable.
for the opposition to be
Lippmann balances the phrasal topics of administration and 
 opposition, and closes by balancing the stressed sounds and mean-
ings of arbitrary, revolutionary, and irreconcilable. He follows with 
a short concluding sentence whose stressed words are not coordi-
nated, but still balanced (I use square brackets to indicate nonco-
ordinated balance):
Where
that balance no longer exists,
democracy perishes.
Then he creates an especially intricate design, balancing many 
sounds and meanings:
unless
that they can affect policy
                     but
that no one can wholly 
dominate it,
unless all the citizens of a state are forced by circumstances 
                                                                              to compromise,
     
freedom cannot be maintained.
habit
   and
necessity
For
they feel
they have to
unless by
give
and
take,
• He repeats citizens as the subject/topic of each clause: all the 
citizens, they, they (note the passive in the first one: citizens 

 Lesson 11 Elegance 171
are forced; the active version would have unbalanced the 
coordination).
•	He balances the sound and sense of force against feel, and the 
meaning of affect policy against the meaning of dominate it.
•	In the last unless clause, he balances the meaning of habit 
against necessity, and the stressed give against take.
•	He balances the meanings of compromise, affect, dominate, 
and give and take.
•	Then to balance the clauses of that short preceding sentence, 
balance no longer exists—democracy perishes, he concludes 
with an equally short clause, freedom cannot be maintained, 
whose meaning and structure echo the corresponding pair in 
the preceding sentence:
balance no longer exists
democracy             perishes
freedom cannot be maintained
For those who notice and care, it is an impressive construction.
Uncoordinated Balance We can also balance structures that 
are not grammatically coordinate. In this example, the subject 
balances the object:
Scientists whose research
those of us who
creates revolutionary views of 
the universe
construe reality from our
common-sense experience of it.
invariably confuse
Here, the predicate of a relative clause in a subject balances the 
predicate of the sentence:
A government
that is unwilling to listen to the 
moderate hopes of its citizenry
must eventually answer to the harsh
justice of its revolutionaries.

172 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Here a direct object balances the object of a preposition:
Those of us concerned with our school systems will not sacrice
the intellectual growth of      our innocent children
                                       to
the social engineering of       incompetent bureaucrats.
A more complicated balance:
 Were I trading
1a
 I would not be writing
1b
 scholarly principles
2a
for
nancial security,
2b
short books
3a
 
on
minor subjects
3b
for
small audiences.
3c
In that sentence,
• a subordinate clause (1a), Were I trading, balances the main 
clause (1b), I would not be writing;
•	the object of that subordinate clause (2a), scholarly principles, 
balances the object in the prepositional phrase (2b), financial 
security;
•	the object in the main clause (3a), short books, balances 
 objects in two prepositional phrases, (3b), minor subjects, 
and (3c), small audiences (with the balanced short, minor, and 
small).
Remember that you usually create the most rhythmical balance 
when each succeeding balanced element is a bit longer than the 
previous one. (see p. 157–158).
These patterns encourage you to think in ways that you other-
wise might not. In that sense, they don’t just shape your thinking; 
they generate it. Suppose you begin a sentence like this:
 
In his earliest years, Picasso was a master draftsman of the  traditional 
human form.

 Lesson 11 Elegance 173
Now try this:
 
In his earliest years, Picasso was not only a master draftsman of the 
traditional human form, but also . . .
To finish, you have to wonder what else he might—or might not—
have been.
Here’s the point: The most striking feature of elegant 
prose is balanced sentence structure. You most easily 
 balance one part of a sentence against another by coor-
dinating them with and, or, nor, but, and yet, but you can 
also balance noncoordinated phrases and clauses. Used 
to excess, these patterns can seem merely clever, but used 
prudently, they can emphasize an important point or con-
clude a line of reasoning with a flourish that careful read-
ers notice.
climactic emphasis
How you begin a sentence determines its clarity; how you end it 
determines its rhythm and grace. Here are five ways to end a sen-
tence with special emphasis:
1. Weighty Words
When we get close to the end of a sentence, we expect words that 
deserve stress (pp. 83–84), so we may feel a sentence is anticlimac-
tic if it ends on words of slight grammatical or semantic weight. 
At the end of a sentence, prepositions feel light—one reason we 
sometimes avoid leaving one there. The rhythm of a sentence 
should carry readers toward strength. Compare:
 
Studies into intellectual differences among races are projects that 
only the most politically naive psychologist would be willing to give 
support to.
✓ 
Studies into intellectual differences among races are projects that 
only the most politically naive psychologist would be willing to 
support.

174 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Adjectives and adverbs are heavier than prepositions, but 
lighter than nouns, the heaviest of which are nominalizations. 
Readers have problems with nominalizations in the subject of 
a sentence, but at the end they provide a satisfyingly climactic 
thump, particularly when two of them are in coordinate balance. 
Consider this excerpt from Winston Churchill’s “Finest Hour” 
speech. Churchill ended it with a parallelism climaxed by a bal-
anced pair of nouns:
     steps forth to
. . . until in God’s good time,
the New World, with all its
power
and 
might
the rescue
 and
the liberation
of the old.
He could have written more simply, and more banally:
 
. . . until the New World rescues us.
2. Of + Weighty Word
This seems unlikely, but it’s true. Look at how Churchill ends his 
sentence: the light of (followed by a lighter a or the) quickens the 
rhythm of a sentence just before the stress of the climactic mono-
syllable, old:
 
. . . the rescue and the liberation of the old.
We associate this pattern with self-conscious elegance, as in the 
first few sentences of Edward Gibbon’s History of the Decline and 
Fall of the Roman Empire (contrast that title with History of the 
Roman Empire’s Decline and Fall):
✓ 
In the second century of the Christian era, the Empire of Rome 
comprehended the fairest part of the earth, 
and the most civi-
lized portion of mankind. The frontiers of that extensive monar-
chy were guarded by ancient renown 
and disciplined valour. The 
gentle but powerful influence of laws and manners had gradually 

 Lesson 11 Elegance 175
cemented the union of the provinces. Their peaceful  inhabitants 
enjoyed 
and abused the advantages of wealth and luxury. The 
image of a free constitution was preserved with decent reverence: 
the Roman  senate appeared to possess the sovereign authority, and 
devolved on the 
 
emperors all the executive powers of government.
In contrast, this is flat:
 
In the second century ad, the Roman Empire comprehended the 
earth’s fairest, most civilized part. Ancient renown and dis-
ciplined valour guarded its extensive frontiers. The gentle but 
 powerful  influence of laws and manners had gradually unified 
the provinces. Their peaceful inhabitants enjoyed and abused 
 luxurious wealth while decently preserving what seemed to be 
a free  constitution. Appearing to possess the sovereign author-
ity, the  Roman senate devolved on the emperors all executive 
 governmental  powers.
3. Echoing Salience
At the end of a sentence, readers hear special emphasis when  
a stressed word or phrase balances the sound or meaning of  
an earlier one. These examples are all from Peter Gay’s Style  
in History:
✓
  I have written these essays to anatomize this familiar yet  really 
strange being, style the centaur; the book may be read as an 
 extended critical commentary on Buffon’s famous saying that the 
style is the man.
When we hear a stressed word echo an earlier one, these balances 
become even more emphatic:
✓
  Apart  from  a  few  mechanical  tricks  of  rhetoric,  manner  is  
 indissolubly linked to matter; style shapes, and in turn is shaped 
by, substance.
✓
  It seems frivolous, almost inappropriate, to be stylish about style.
Gay echoes both the sound and meaning of manner in matter, style 
in substance, shapes in shaped by, and stylish in style.
4. Chiasmus
This device (pronounced kye-AZZ-muss) is interesting perhaps 
only to those fascinated by arcane figures of style. The word 
 chiasmus is from the Greek word for “crossing.” It balances 
 elements in two parts of a sentence, but the second part reverses the  

176 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
order of the elements in the first part. For example, this next sen-
tence would be both coordinate and parallel, but it does not end 
with a chiasmus, because the elements in the two parts are in the 
same order (1A1B : 2A2B):
 A concise style 
    can improve both
our own
1A
 thinking
1B
                        and
our readers
’
2A
 understanding.
2B
Were we seeking a special effect, we could reverse the order of 
elements in the second part to mirror those in the first. Now the 
pattern is not 1A1B : 2A2B, but rather 1A1B : 2B2A:
 A concise style 
    can improve not only
our own
1A
 thinking
1B
                        but
the understanding
2B
 of our readers.
2A
 
The next example is more complex. The first two elements are par-
allel, but the last three mirror one another: AB CDE : AB EDC:
You
A 
reveal
B 
your own
C 
highest rhetorical
D    
SKILL
E
                             by the way
you
A 
respect
B 
THE BELIEFS
E 
most deeply held
D  
by your reader.
C
5. Suspension
Finally, you can wind up a sentence with a dramatic climax by 
ignoring some earlier advice. In Lesson 10, I advised you to open a 
sentence with its point. But self-consciously elegant writers often 
open a sentence with a series of parallel and coordinated phrases 
and clauses just so that they can delay and thereby heighten a 
sense of climax:

 Lesson 11 Elegance 177
 If [journalists] held themselves as responsible for the rise of public 
cynicism as they hold “venal” politicians and the “selfish” public; 
if they considered that the license they have to criticize and de-
fame comes with an implied responsibility to serve the public—if 
they did all or any of these things, they would make journalism 
more useful, public life stronger, and themselves far more worthy 
of esteem.
—James Fallows. Breaking the News
That sentence (the last one in Fallows’s book) opens with three if 
clauses and ends with a triple coordination. It ends on its longest 
member, one that itself ends with an of + nominalization (worthy 
of esteem). Like all such devices, however, the impact of a long 
suspension is inversely proportional to its frequency of use: the 
less it’s used, the bigger its bang.
Here’s the point: An elegant sentence should end on 
strength. You can create that strength in five ways:
1. End with a strong word, or better, a pair of them.
2. End with a prepositional phrase introduced by of.
3. End with an echoing salience.
4. End with a chiasmus.
5. Build up to the end.
extravagant elegance
When writers combine all these elements in a single sentence, we 
know they are aiming at something special, as in this next passage:
 Far from being locked inside our own skins, inside the “dungeons” 
of ourselves, we are now able to recognize that our minds belong, 
quite naturally, to a collective “mind,” a mind in which we share 
everything that is mental, most obviously language itself, and that 
the old  boundary of the skin is not boundary at all but a  membrane 

178 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
  connecting  the  inner  and  outer  experience  of  existence.  Our  
 intelligence, our wit, our cleverness, our unique personalities—all are 
simultaneously “our own” possessions and the world’s.
—Joyce Carol Oates, “New Heaven and New Earth”
Here is the anatomy of that passage:
Far from being locked inside our own skins,
                                      inside the “dungeons” of ourselves,
we are now able to recognize
that our minds belong, quite naturally, to a collective “mind,”
a mind in which we share
that the old boundary of the skin is
everything that is mental,
most obviously language 
                                itself,
not boundary at all
               but
a membrane connecting 
the inner and outer 
experience of existence.
Our intelligence,
our wit,
our cleverness,
our unique 
personalities
—all are simultaneously
“our own” possessions 
     and
the world’s.
   and
In addition to all the coordination, note the two resumptive 
modifiers:
 
Far from being locked inside our own skins,
 inside the “dungeons” of ourselves . . .
 
our minds belong . . . to a collective “mind,” 
 a mind in which we share . . .

 Lesson 11 Elegance 179
Note too the two nominalizations stressed at the end of the first 
sentence and the coordinate nominalizations at the end of the 
second:
 
. . . the inner and outer experience of existence.
 
. . . “our own” possessions and the world’s.
But such patterns can be more elaborate yet. Here is the 
last sentence from Frederick Jackson Turner’s The Frontier in 
 American  History:
 This then is the heritage of the pioneer experience—a passionate be-
lief that a democracy was possible which should leave the individual 
a part to play in a free society and not make him a cog in a machine 
operated from above; which trusted in the common man, in his 
 tolerance, his ability to adjust differences with good humor, and to 
work out an American type from the contributions of all nations—
a type for which he would fight against those who challenged it in 
arms, and for which in time of war he would make sacrifices, even 
the temporary sacrifice of his individual freedom and his life, lest 
that freedom be lost forever.
Note the following:
• the summative modifier in the opening segment: a passionate 
belief that . . .
•	the  increased  length  and  weight  of  the  second  element   
in  each  coordination,  even  the  coordinations  inside  
coordinations
•	the two resumptive modifiers beginning with type and sacrifice
That may be over the top, especially the quadruple chiasmus in 
the last sixteen words:
 
the temporary
1
    sacrifice
2
 of his individual freedom
3
 and his life
4
,
 
lest
4
                 that                 freedom
3
 be lost
2
 forever
1
.
The meaning of temporary balances forever; sacrifice balances lost; 
freedom echoes freedom; and the sound of life balances lest (not to 
mention the near rhyme of lest in lost). You just don’t see that kind 
of sentence anymore.

180 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Here is its anatomy:
This then is the heritage of the pioneer experience—
                     a passionate belief that a democracy was possible
which trusted
in the common man,
in his tolerance,
which should
leave the individual a part to play 
in a free society
                           and
not make him a cog in a machine 
operated from above;
to adjust differences 
with good humor,
                and
to work out an 
American type 
from the 
contributions of 
all nations—
for which he would ght against 
those who challenged it in arms,
                          and
for which in time of war he would 
make sacrices,
his individual 
freedom
   and
his life,
lest that freedom be lost forever.
[resumptive 
modifier #1]
a type
even the temporary sacrice of
[resumptive 
modifier #2]
his ability
[summative modifier]
Exercise 11.1
Here are some first halves of sentences to finish with balancing last 
halves. For example, given this:
Those who keep silent over the loss of small freedoms . . . finish 
with something like this:
. . . will be silenced when they protest the loss of large ones.

 Lesson 11    Elegance 181
 1. Those who argue stridently over small matters . . .
 2. While the strong are often afraid to admit weakness, the  
weak . . .
 3. We should pay more attention to those politicians who tell us 
how to make what we have better than to those . . .
 4. When parents raise children who scorn hard work, the adults 
those children become will . . .
 5. Some teachers mistake neat papers that rehash old ideas for . . .
Exercise 11.2
These sentences end weakly. Edit them for clarity and concision, 
then revise them so that they end on more heavily stressed words, 
particularly with prepositional phrases beginning with of. For 
example:
 Our interest in paranormal phenomena testifies to the fact 
that we have empty spirits and shallow minds.
✓ 
Our  interest  in  paranormal  phenomena  testifies  to  the 
 emptiness of our spirits and the shallowness of our minds.
In the first three, I boldface words you might nominalize.
 1. If  we  invest  our  sweat  in  these  projects,  we  must  avoid  
 appearing to work only because we are 
interested in ourselves.
 2. The plan for the political campaign was concocted by those who 
were not sensitive to what we needed most critically.
 3. Throughout history, science has made progress because  dedicated 
scientists have ignored a hostile public that is uninformed.
 4. Not one tendency in our governmental system has brought 
about more changes in American daily life than federal govern-
mental agencies that are very powerful.
 5. The day is gone when school systems’ boards of education have 
the expectation that local taxpayers will automatically go along 
with whatever extravagant things incompetent bureaucrats 
 decide to do.
NuaNces of LeNgth aNd Rhythm
Most writers don’t plan the length of their sentences, but that’s not 
a problem, unless every sentence is shorter than fifteen words or 
so, or much longer. Artful writers, however, do use the length of 

182 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
a sentence for a purpose. Some write short sentences to strike a 
note of urgency:
 Toward noon Petrograd again became the field of military action; 
rifles and machine guns rang out everywhere. It was not easy to tell 
who was shooting or where. One thing was clear; the past and the 
future were exchanging shots. There was much casual firing; young 
boys were shooting off revolvers unexpectedly acquired. The  arsenal 
was wrecked. . . . Shots rang out on both sides. But the board fence 
stood in the way, dividing the soldiers from the revolution. The 
 attackers decided to break down the fence. They broke down part 
of it and set fire to the rest. About twenty barracks came into view. 
The bicyclists were concentrated in two or three of them. The empty 
 barracks were set fire to at once.
—Leon Trotsky, The Russian Revolution, trans. Max Eastman
Or terse certainty:
The teacher or lecturer is a danger. He very seldom recognizes 
his n ature or his position. The lecturer is a man who must talk for an 
hour.
France may possibly have acquired the intellectual leader-
ship of Europe when their academic period was cut down to forty 
minutes.
I also have lectured. The lecturer’s first problem is to have 
enough words to fill forty or sixty minutes. The professor is paid for 
his time, his results are almost impossible to estimate. . . .
No teacher has ever failed from ignorance.
That is empiric professional knowledge.
Teachers fail because they cannot “handle the class.”
Real education must ultimately be limited to men who inSiSt 
on knowing, the rest is mere sheep-herding.
—Ezra Pound, ABC of Reading
Or directness. Here, Mark Twain uses short grammatical sen-
tences to mimic an adult speaking didactically to children; but he 
uses long punctuated sentences—not just large words—to wink at 
his more knowing readers (for the distinction between grammati-
cal and punctuated sentences, see Lesson 11, pp. 208–209):
These chapters are for children, and I shall try to make the words 
large enough to command respect. In the hope that you are listening, 
and that you have confidence in me, I will proceed. Dates are dif-
ficult things to acquire; and after they are acquired it is difficult to 
keep them in the head. But they are very valuable. They are like the 
cattle-pens of a ranch—they shut in the several brands of historical 
cattle, each within its own fence, and keep them from getting mixed 
together. Dates are hard to remember because they consist of figures; 
figures are monotonously unstriking in appearance, and they don’t 

 Lesson 11    Elegance 183
take hold, they form no pictures, and so they give the eye no chance 
to help. Pictures are the thing. Pictures can make dates stick. They 
can make nearly anything stick—particularly if you make the pictures 
yourself. Indeed, that is the great point—make the pictures yourself. I 
know about this from experience.
—Mark Twain, How to Make History Dates Stick
Self-conscious stylists also write extravagantly long sentences. 
Here is just a piece of one whose sinuous length seems to mirror 
the confused progress of a protest march:
In any event, up at the front of this March, in the first line, back of 
that hollow square of monitors, Mailer and Lowell walked in this 
 barrage of cameras, helicopters, TV cars, monitors, loudspeakers, 
and  wavering buckling twisting line of notables, arms linked (line 
twisting so much that at times the movement was in file, one arm 
locked ahead, one behind, then the line would undulate about and 
the other arm would be ahead) speeding up a few steps, slowing 
down while a great happiness came back into the day as if finally 
one stood under some mythical arch in the great vault of history, 
 helicopters buzzing about, chop-chop, and the sense of America 
 divided on this day now liberated some undiscovered patriotism in 
Mailer so that he felt a sharp searing love for his country in this 
 moment and on this day, crossing some divide in his own mind 
wider than the Potomac, a love so lacerated he felt as if a marriage 
were being torn and children lost—never does one love so much as 
then, obviously, then—and an odor of wood smoke, from where you 
knew not, was also in the air, a smoke of dignity and some calm 
heroism, not unlike the sense of freedom which also comes when 
a marriage is burst—Mailer knew for the first time why men in the 
front line of battle are almost always ready to die; there is a promise 
of some swift transit . . . [it goes on]
—Norman Mailer, The Armies of the Night
We almost feel we are eavesdropping on Mailer’s stream of 
thought. But of course, such a sentence is the product not of an 
overflow of feeling but of premeditated art.
• Mailer opens with short, staccato phrases to suggest  confusion, 
but he controls them by coordination.
•	He continues the sentence by coordinating free modifiers: 
arms linked . . . (line twisting . . .) speeding up . . .
•	After  several  more  free  modifiers,  he  continues  with  a  
 resumptive  modifier: a love so lacerated . . .
•	After another grammatical sentence, he adds another resump-
tive modifier: a smoke of dignity and some calm  heroism . . .

184 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Here’s the point: Think about the length of your sen-
tences only if they are all longer than thirty words or so or 
shorter than fifteen. Your sentences will vary naturally if you 
edit them in the ways you’ve seen here. But if the occasion 
allows, feel free to experiment.
in yoUr own words
Exercise 11.3
You develop a knack for balance by imitating models—not word 
for word, just their general pattern. Pick some nicely balanced 
 passages you admire, perhaps from sermons, political speeches, or 
dictionaries of quotations, and try imitating them. Choose a subject 
of your own, and follow your model’s outline, as this writer did 
with a passage from Frederick Jackson Turner:
 Survival in the wilderness requires the energy and wit to over-
come the brute facts of an uncooperative Nature but rewards 
the person who acquires that power with the satisfaction of 
having done it once and with the confidence of being able to 
do it again.
 Life as a college student offers a few years of intellectual 
 excitement but imposes a sense of anxiety on those who look 
ahead and know that its end is in sight.
You can also imitate examples from this Lesson.
Exercise 11.4
Congratulations, you have made it through eleven Lessons on clar-
ity and grace. This exercise is an opportunity for you to see how far 
you’ve come. Give a reader two 500-word passages of your writing, 
one completed before you started working through this book and 
another you have completed more recently. Can your reader tell 
which is which? What specific changes have you made in your writ-
ing style? Use the principles from this book to describe the differ-
ences between your old and new writing.

 Lesson 11 Elegance 185
sUmming Up
The qualities of elegance are too varied and subtle to capture in 
a summary. Nevertheless, elegant passages typically have three 
characteristics that may seem incompatible but are not:
•	the simplicity of characters as subjects and actions as verbs
•	the complexity of balanced syntax, meaning, sound, and 
rhythm
•	the emphasis of artfully stressed endings
You won’t acquire an elegant style just by reading this book. 
You must read those who write elegantly until their style runs 
along your muscles and nerves. Only then can you look at your 
own prose and know when it is elegant or just inflated. To make 
that distinction, I think the only reliable rule is Less is more.  
Of the many graces of style, compression is still, I think, the first.

186 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Summary: Part 4
To the principles we laid out in Part Two, we add these four:
  1. Prune redundancy.
•	Delete words that mean little or nothing.
•	Delete words that repeat the meaning of other words.
•	Delete words implied by other words.
•	Replace a phrase with a word.
•	Change negatives to affirmatives.
  2.    Get the point of the sentence up front in a concise main 
clause.
  3. Get to the verb in the main clause quickly.
•	Keep introductory clauses and phrases short.
•	Keep subjects short.
•	Don’t interrupt the subject-verb connection.
  4. Avoid extending the line of a sentence by attaching more 
than one subordinate clause to one of the same kind. 
Instead,
•	Coordinate phrases and clauses, balanced ones if you 
seek a special effect.
•	Use resumptive, summative, and free modifiers.
  5.   Try balancing parts of sentences against one another, 
 especially their last few words.

Part FIVE
Ethics
Ethics is in origin the art of recommending to others the 
sacrifices required for cooperation with oneself.
—berTrand ruSSell

188
Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler.
—alberT einSTein
Simplicity is not a given. It is an achievement, a human invention, 
a discovery, a beloved belief.
—William GaSS
Style is the ultimate morality of mind.
—alfred norTh WhiTehead
Beyond Polish
It is easy to think that style is just the polish that makes a sentence 
go down smoothly, but more than appeal is at stake in choosing 
subjects and verbs in these two sentences:
     1a.     Shiites and Sunnis diSTruST one another because they have 
 
enGaGed in generations of cultural conflict.
     1b.     Generations of cultural conflict 
have cauSed distrust among 
Shiites and Sunnis.
Which sentence more accurately reflects what causes the distrust 
among the three—their deliberate actions, as in (1a), or, as in (1b), 
the circumstances of their history? Such a choice of subjects and 
verbs even implies a philosophy of human action: do we freely 
choose to act, or do circumstances cause us to? Later, we’ll look 
Lesson 
12
The Ethics of Style

 Lesson 12 The Ethics of Style 189
at the way this issue plays itself out in our own Declaration of 
Independence.
Our choice of what kind of character to tell a story about—people 
or their circumstances—involves more than ease of reading, even 
more than a philosophy of action, because every such choice also 
has an ethical dimension.
The eThical ResPonsiBiliTies of  
WRiTeRs and ReadeRs
In the last eleven lessons, I have emphasized the responsibility 
writers owe readers to write clearly. But readers also have a re-
sponsibility to read hard enough to understand ideas too difficult 
for Dick-and-Jane sentences. It would be impossible, for example, 
for an engineer to revise this into language clear to everyone:
 The drag force on a particle of diameter d moving with speed u 
relative to a fluid of density p and viscosity μ is usually modeled by  
F = 0.5C
D
u
2
A, where A is the cross-sectional area of the particle at 
right angles to the motion.
Most of us do work hard to understand—at least until we de-
cide that a writer failed to work equally hard to help us under-
stand, or, worse, deliberately made our reading more difficult 
than it has to be. Once we decide that a writer is careless, lazy, or 
self-indulgent—well, our days are too few to spend them on those 
indifferent to our needs.
But our response to gratuitous complexity only reemphasizes 
our responsibility to our own readers, for it seems axiomatic that 
if we don’t want others to impose carelessly complex writing on 
us, then we ought not impose it on others. If we are socially re-
sponsible writers, we should make our ideas no simpler than they 
deserve, but no more difficult than they have to be.
Responsible writers follow a rule whose more general theme 
you probably recognize:
 Write to others as you would have others write to you.
Few of us violate this First Rule of Ethical Writing deliberately. 
It’s just that we are all inclined to think that our own writing is 
clear: If our readers struggle to understand it, the problem must 
be not our flawed writing but their shallow reading.
But that’s a mistake, because if you underestimate your 
 readers’ real needs, you risk losing more than their attention. 
You risk losing what writers since Aristotle have called a reliable 

190 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
ethos—the character that readers infer from your writing: Does it 
make them think you are accessible or difficult? Trustworthy or 
deceitful? Amiably candid or impersonally aloof?
Over time, the ethos you project in individual pieces of writ-
ing hardens into your reputation. So it’s not just altruistically 
generous to go an extra step to help readers understand. It’s prag-
matically smart, because we tend to trust most a writer with a rep-
utation for being thoughtful, reliable, and considerate of readers’ 
needs.
But what is at stake here is more than even reputation: it is the 
ethical foundation of a literate society. We write ethically when, 
as a matter of principle, we would trade places with our intended 
readers and experience the consequences they do after they read 
our writing. Unfortunately, it’s not quite that simple. How, for ex-
ample, do we judge those who write opaquely without knowing 
they do, or those who knowingly write that way and defend it?
Unintended Obscurity
Those who write in ways that seem dense and convoluted rarely 
intend to do so. For example, I do not believe that the writers of 
this next passage knowingly wrote it as unclearly as they did:
 A major condition affecting adult reliance on early  communicative 
patterns is the extent to which the communication has been planned 
prior to its delivery. Adult speech behaviour takes on many of the 
characteristics of child language, where the communication is 
 spontaneous and relatively unpredictable.
—E. Ochs and B. Schieffelin, Planned and Unplanned Discourse
That means (I think):
 When we speak spontaneously, we rely on patterns of child language.
The authors might object that I have oversimplified their idea, but 
those eleven words express what I remember from their 44, and 
what really counts, after all, is not what we understand as we read, 
but how well we remember it the next day.
The ethical issue here is not those writers’ willful indifference, 
but their innocent ignorance. In that case, when writers don’t 
know better, we readers have the duty to meet another term of the 
reader-writer contract: we must not just read carefully, but when 
given the opportunity, respond candidly and helpfully. I know 
many of you think that right now you do not have the standing to 
do that. But one day, you will.

 Lesson 12 The Ethics of Style 191
Intended Misdirection
The ethics of writing are clearer when writers knowingly use 
 language not to further their readers’ interests but to disguise 
their own.
Example #1: Who Erred? Sears was once accused of overcharging 
for automobile repairs. It responded with an ad saying:
 With over two million automotive customers serviced last year in 
California alone, mistakes may have occurred. However, Sears wants 
you to know that we would never intentionally violate the trust cus-
tomers have shown in our company for 105 years.
In the first sentence, the writer avoided mentioning Sears as  
the party responsible for mistakes. He could have used a passive 
verb:
 . . . mistakes may have been made.
But that would have encouraged us to wonder By whom? Instead, 
the writer found a verb that moved Sears off stage by saying mis-
takes just “occurred,” seemingly on their own.
In the second sentence, though, the writer focused on Sears, 
the responsible agent, because he wanted to emphasize its good 
intentions:
Sears . . . would never intentionally violate . . .
If we revise the first sentence to focus on Sears and the second to 
hide it, we get a very different effect:
 When we serviced over two million automotive customers last year 
in California, we made mistakes. However, you should know that no 
intentional violation of 105 years of trust occurred.
That’s a small point of stylistic manipulation, self-interested but 
innocent of any malign motives. This next one is more significant.
Example #2: Who Pays? Consider this letter from a natural gas 
utility telling me and hundreds of thousands of other customers 
that it was raising our rates. (The subject/topic in every clause, 
main or subordinate, is boldfaced.)
The Illinois Commerce Commission has authorized a restructur-
ing of our rates together with an increase in Service Charge rev-
enues effective with service rendered on and after November 12, 
1990. This is the first increase in rates for Peoples Gas in over six 
years. The restructuring of rates is consistent with the policy of 
the  Public Utilities Act that rates for service to various classes of  

192 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
utility  customers be based upon the cost of providing that service. 
The new rates move revenues from every class of customer closer to 
the cost actually incurred to provide gas service.
That notice is a model of misdirection: after the first sentence, the 
writer never begins a sentence with a human character, least of all 
the character whose interests are most at stake—me, the reader. 
He (or perhaps she) mentions me only twice, in the third person, 
never as a subject/topic/agent:
. . . for service to various classes of utility customers
. . . move revenues from every class of customer
The writer mentions the company only once, in the third person, 
and not as a responsible subject/topic/agent:
. . . increase in rates for Peoples Gas
Had the company wanted to make clear who the real “doer” was 
and who was being done to, the notice would have read more like 
this:
 According to the Illinois Commerce Commission, we can now make 
you pay more for your gas service after November 12, 1990. We 
have not made you pay more in over six years, but under the Public 
 Utilities Act, now we can.
If the writer intended to deflect responsibility, then we can reason-
ably charge him with breaching the First Rule of Ethical Writing, 
for surely, he would not want that same kind of writing directed to 
him, systematically hiding who is doing what in a matter close to 
his interests.
Example #3: Who Dies? Finally, here is a passage that raises 
an even greater ethical issue, one involving life and death. Some 
time ago, the Government  Accounting Office investigated why 
more than half the car owners who got recall letters did not get 
their cars fixed. It found that car owners could not understand 
the letters or were not sufficiently alarmed by them to bring their 
cars back to the dealer for service.
I received the following. (When asked my make of car, I dodge 
the question.) It shows how writers can meet a legal obligation 
while evading an ethical one (I numbered the sentences):
 
1
A defect which involves the possible failure of a frame support 
plate may exist on your vehicle. 
2
This plate (front suspension pivot 
bar support plate) connects a portion of the front suspension to the 
 vehicle frame, and 
3
its failure could affect vehicle directional  control, 

 Lesson 12 The Ethics of Style 193
 particularly during heavy brake application. 
4
In addition, your 
 vehicle may require adjustment service to the hood secondary catch 
system. 
5
The secondary catch may be misaligned so that the hood 
may not be adequately restrained to prevent hood fly-up in the event  
the primary latch is inadvertently left unengaged. 
6
Sudden hood 
 fly-up beyond the secondary catch while driving could impair driver 
visibility. 
7
In certain circumstances, occurrence of either of the above 
conditions could result in vehicle crash without prior warning.
First, look at the subjects/topics of the sentences:
1
a defect 
2
this plate 
3
its failure
4
your vehicle 
5
the secondary catch 
6
sudden hood fly-up 
7 
occurrence of either condition 
The main character/topic of that story is not me, the driver, but 
my car and its parts. In fact, the writers ignored me almost en-
tirely (I am in your vehicle twice and driver once), and omitted all 
references to themselves. In sum, it says:
 There is a car that might have defective parts. Its plate could fail and 
its hood fly up. If they do, it could crash without warning.
The writers—probably a committee of lawyers—also nominalized 
verbs and made others passive when they referred to actions that 
might alarm me (n = nominalization, p = passive):
Failure
n
 vehicle directional heavy brake
             control
n
        application
n
be misaligned
p
 not be restrained
p
 hood fly-up
n
is left unengaged
p
 driver visibility
n
             warning
n
If the writers intended to deflect my fear and maybe my anger, 
then they violated their ethical duty to write to me as they would 
have me write to them, for surely they would not swap places with 
a reader deliberately lulled into ignoring a condition that threat-
ened his life.
Of course, being candid has its costs. I would be naive to claim 
that everyone is free to write as he or she pleases, especially when 
a writer’s job depends on protecting an employer’s self-interest. 
Maybe the writers of that letter felt coerced into writing it as they 
did. But that doesn’t mitigate the consequences. When we know-
ingly write in ways that we would not want others to write to us, 
we abrade the trust that sustains a civil society.
We should not, of course, confuse unethical indirectness 
with the human impulse to soften bad news. When a supervisor 
says I’m afraid our new funding didn’t come through, we know it 

194 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
means You have no job. But that indirectness is motivated not by 
 dishonesty, but by kindness.
In short, our choice of subjects is crucial not only when  
we want to be clear, but also when we want to be honest or 
deceptive.
Exercise 12.1
Revise the gas rate notice, using you as a subject/topic/agent. Then 
revise again, using we. For example:
As the Illinois Commerce Commission has authorized, you will have to 
pay us higher service charges after November 12, 1990/we can charge 
you more after November 12 . . .
Would the company resist sending either revision? Why? Was the 
original “good” writing? What do you mean by good?
Exercise 12.2
Revise the recall letter, making you the subject of as many verbs 
and naming as many actions in verbs as you can. One of the sen-
tences will read,
If you brake hard and the plate fails, you could . . .
Would the company be reluctant to send out that version? Is the 
original letter “good” writing? Which of the following, if either, is 
closer to the “truth”? Is that even the right question?
If the plate fails, you could crash.
If the plate fails, your car could crash.
RaTionalizing oPaciTy
Necessary Complexity
A trickier ethical issue is how we should respond to those who 
know they write in a complex style but claim they must because 
they are breaking new intellectual ground. Are they right, or is 
that self-serving rationalization? This is a vexing question, not just 
because we can settle it only case by case, but because we may 
not be able to settle some cases at all, at least not to everyone’s 
satisfaction.

 Lesson 12 The Ethics of Style 195
Here, for example, is a sentence from a leading figure in 
 contemporary literary theory:
 If, for a while, the ruse of desire is calculable for the uses of  discipline 
soon the repetition of guilt, justification, pseudo-scientific theories, 
superstition, spurious authorities and classifications can be seen 
as the desperate effort to “normalize” formally the disturbance of a 
 discourse of splitting that violates the rational, enlightened claims of 
its enunciatory modality.
—Homi K. Babba
Does that sentence express a thought so subtle and complex that 
its substance can be expressed only as written? Or is it academic 
babble? How do we decide whether in fact his nuances are, at 
least for ordinarily competent readers, just not accessible, given 
the time most of us have for figuring them out?
We owe our readers precise and nuanced prose, but we ought 
not to assume that they owe us an indefinite amount of their time 
to unpack it. If we choose to write in ways that we know will make 
readers struggle—well, it’s a free country. In the marketplace of 
ideas, truth is the prime value, but not the only one. Another is 
what it costs us to find it.
In the final analysis, I can suggest only that when writers 
claim their prose style must be difficult because their ideas are 
new, they are, as a matter of simple fact, more often wrong than 
right. The philosopher of language Ludwig Wittgenstein said:
 Whatever can be thought can be thought clearly; whatever can be 
written can be written clearly.
I’d add a nuance:
 . . . and with just a bit more effort, more clearly still.
Salutary Complexity/Subversive Clarity
There are two more defenses of complexity: one claims that com-
plexity is good for us, the other that clarity is bad.
As to the first claim, some argue that the harder we have to work 
to understand what we read, the more deeply we think and the better 
we understand. Everyone should be happy to know that no evidence 
supports so foolish a claim, and substantial evidence contradicts it.
As to the second claim, some argue that “clarity” is a device 
wielded by those in power to mislead us about who really controls 
our lives. By speaking and writing in deceptively simple ways, 
they say, those who control the facts dumb them down, rendering 

196 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
us unable to understand the full complexity of our political and 
 social  circumstances:
 The call to write curriculum in a language that is touted as clear and 
accessible is evidence of a moral and political vision that increasingly 
collapses under the weight of its own anti-intellectualism. .  .  . [T]hose 
who make a call for clear writing synonymous with an attack on criti-
cal educators have missed the role that the “language of clarity” plays 
in a dominant culture that cleverly and powerfully uses “clear” and 
“simplistic” language to systematically undermine and prevent the 
conditions from arising for a public culture to engage in rudimentary 
forms of complex and critical thinking.
—Stanley Aronowitz, Postmodern Education
This writer makes one good point: language is deeply impli-
cated in politics, ideology, and control. In our earliest history, 
the educated elite used writing itself to exclude the illiterate, then 
Latin and French to exclude those who knew only English. More 
recently, those in authority have relied on a vocabulary thick with 
Latinate nominalizations and on a Standard English that requires 
those Outs aspiring to join the Ins to submit to a decades-long ed-
ucation, during which time they are expected to acquire not only 
the language of the Ins but their values as well.
Moreover, clarity is not a natural virtue, corrupted by fallen 
academics, bureaucrats, and others jealous to preserve their 
 authority. Clarity is a value that is created by society and that so-
ciety must work hard to maintain, for writing clearly is not just 
hard: it is almost an unnatural act. It has to be learned,  sometimes 
 painfully (as this book demonstrates).
So is clarity an ideological value? Well, of course it is. How 
could it be otherwise?
But those who attack clarity as a conspiracy to oversimplify 
complicated social issues are as wrong as those who attack science 
because some use it for malign ends: neither science nor clarity is a 
threat; we are threatened by those who use clarity (or science) to de-
ceive us. It is not clarity that subverts, but the unethical use of it. We 
must simply insist that, in principle, those who manage our affairs 
have a duty to tell us the truth as clearly as they can. They probably 
won’t, but that just shifts the burden to us to call them out on it.
With every sentence we write we have to choose, and the ethi-
cal quality of our choices depends on the motives behind them. 
Only by knowing motives can we know whether a writer of clear or 
complex prose would willingly be the object of such writing, to be 
influenced (or manipulated) in the same way, with the same result.
That seems simple enough. But it’s not.

 Lesson 12 The Ethics of Style 197
an exTended analysis
It is easy to abuse writers who seem to manipulate us through 
their language for their own, self-interested ends. It is more 
 difficult to think about these matters when we are manipulated by 
those whom we would never charge with deceit. But it is just such 
cases that force us to think the hardest about matters of style and 
ethics.
The most celebrated texts in our history are the  Declaration 
of  Independence,  the  Constitution,  and  Abraham  Lincoln’s  
 Gettysburg Address and Second Inaugural Address. In  previous 
editions,  I  discussed  how  Lincoln  artfully  manipulated  the  
 language of his Gettysburg Address and Second Inaugural  Address. 
Here I examine how Thomas Jefferson managed his prose style in 
the Declaration of Independence to influence how we respond to 
the logic of his argument.
The Declaration is celebrated for its logic. After a  discussion 
of human rights and their origin, Jefferson laid out a simple 
syllogism:
Major premise:When a long train of abuses by a government 
evinces a design to reduce a people under 
 despotism, they must throw off such  
government.
Minor premise:These colonies have been abused by a tyrant who 
evinces such a design.
Conclusion:We therefore declare that these colonies are free 
and independent states.
Jefferson’s  argument  is  as  straightforward  as  the  language  
 expressing it is artful.
Jefferson begins with a preamble that explains why the colo-
nists decided to justify their claim of independence, based on the 
surprising idea that revolutionaries must have, and declare, good 
reasons:
When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one 
people to dissolve the political bonds which have connected them 
with another, and to assume among the powers of the earth, the 
 separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and of  nature’s 
God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of  mankind 
 requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the 
separation.

198 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
He then organizes the Declaration into three parts. In the first, he 
offers his major premise, a philosophical justification for a people to 
throw off a tyranny and replace it with a government of their own:
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created 
equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalien-
able rights, that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of hap-
piness. That to secure these rights, governments are instituted among 
men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed. 
That whenever any form of government becomes destructive to these 
ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it, and to insti-
tute new government, laying its foundation on such principles and 
organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely 
to effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate 
that governments long established should not be changed for light 
and transient causes; and accordingly all experience hath shown that 
mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than 
to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accus-
tomed. But when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing 
invariably the same object evinces a design to reduce them under 
 absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such 
government, and to provide new guards for their future security.
In Part 2, Jefferson applies these principles to the colonists’ 
situation:
Such has been the patient sufferance of these colonies; and such is 
now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former sys-
tems of government. The history of the present King of Great Britain 
is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct 
object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over these states. To 
prove this, let facts be submitted to a candid world.
Those facts constitute a litany of King George’s offenses against 
the colonies, evidence supporting Jefferson’s minor premise that 
the king intended to establish “an absolute Tyranny over these 
States”:
 He has refused his assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary 
for the public good.
 He has forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and press-
ing importance, . . .
 He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large 
districts of people, . . .
 He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncom-
fortable, and distant . . .

 Lesson 12 The Ethics of Style 199
Part 3 opens by reviewing the colonists’ attempts to avoid 
separation:
In every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in 
the most humble terms: Our repeated petitions have been answered 
only by repeated injury. A prince, whose character is thus marked by 
every act which may define a tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free 
people.
Nor have we been wanting in attention to our British brethren. 
We have warned them from time to time of attempts by their legis-
lature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have re-
minded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement 
here. We have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity, and 
we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to disavow 
these usurpations, which, would inevitably interrupt our connections 
and correspondence. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, 
which denounces our separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest 
of mankind, enemies in war, in peace friends.
Part 3 ends with the actual declaration of independence:
We, therefore, the representatives of the United States of America,  
in General Congress, assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of 
the world for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the name, and 
by the authority of the good people of these colonies, solemnly pub-
lish and declare, that these united colonies are, and of right ought to 
be free and independent states; that they are absolved from all alle-
giance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between 
them and the state of Great Britain, is and ought to be totally dis-
solved; and that as free and independent states, they have full power 
to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce, 
and to do all other acts and things which independent states may of 
right do. And for the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance 
on the protection of divine providence, we mutually pledge to each 
other our lives, our fortunes and our sacred honor.
Jefferson’s argument is a model of cool logic, but he artfully 
managed his language to incline readers to accept that logic.
Parts 2 and 3 reflect the principles of clarity explained in 
 Lessons 3–6. In Part 2, Jefferson made He (King George) the short, 
concrete subject/topic/agent of all the actions named:
 He has refused . . .
 He has forbidden . . .
 He has refused . . .
 He has called together . . .

200 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
He could have written this:
 His assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the  public 
good, has not been forthcoming . . .
 Laws of immediate and pressing importance have been forbidden . . .
 Places unusual, uncomfortable, and distant from the depository 
of public records have been required as meeting places of legislative 
bodies . . .
Or he could have consistently focused on the colonists:
 We have been deprived of Laws, the most wholesome and necessary . . .
 We lack Laws of immediate and pressing importance . . .
 We have had to meet at places usual, uncomfortable . . .
In other words, Jefferson was not forced by the nature of things to 
make King George the active agent of every oppressive action. But 
that choice supported his argument that the king was a willfully 
abusive tyrant. Such a choice seems so natural, however, that we 
don’t notice that it was a choice.
In Part 3, Jefferson also wrote in a style that reflects our prin-
ciples of clarity: he again matched the characters in his story to 
the subjects/topics of his sentences. But here he switched charac-
ters to the colonists, named we:
     Nor     have we been wanting in attentions to our British brethren.
 We have warned them from time to time . . .
 We have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration . . .
 We have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity . . .
 . . . we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred . . .
 They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity.
 We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity . . .
 We . . . do . . . solemnly publish and declare . . .
 . . . we mutually pledge to each other our Lives . . .
With the one exception of They too have been deaf, all the subjects/
topics are we.
And again, Jefferson was not forced by the nature of things to 
do that. He could have made his British brethren subjects/topics:
 Our British brethren have heard our requests . . .
 They have received our warnings . . .

 Lesson 12 The Ethics of Style 201
 They know the circumstances of our emigration . . .
 They have ignored our pleas . . .
But he chose to assign agency to the colonists to focus first on 
their attempts to negotiate, and only then on their action of 
 declaring  independence.
Again, his choices were not inevitable, but they seem natural, 
even unremarkable: King George did all those bad things, so we 
must declare our independence. But they were not inevitable. What 
more is there to say about the style of Parts 2 and 3, other than 
that Jefferson made the obviously right choices?
Far more interesting are Jefferson’s choices in Part 1, the 
words we have committed to our national memory. In that part, 
he chose a quite different style. In fact, in Part 1, he wrote only 
two sentences that make a person the subject of an active verb:
 
. . . they [the colonists] should declare the causes . . .
 We hold these truths to be self-evident . . .
There are four other subject-verb sequences that have short, con-
crete subjects, but they are all in the passive voice:
 . . . all men are created equal . . . 
 . . . they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights . . .
 . . . governments are instituted among Men . . . 
 . . . governments long established should not be changed for light 
and transient causes . . . 
In the first two sentences, the agent is obviously God, but in the 
last two, the passives explicitly obscure the agency of people in 
general and the colonists in particular.
In the rest of Part 1, Jefferson chose a style that is even more 
impersonal, making abstractions the subjects/topics/agents of al-
most every important verb. In fact, most of his sentences would 
yield to the kind of revisions we described in Lessons 3–6:
 When in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one 
people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them 
with another . . . 
✓
 When in the course of human events, we decide we must dissolve the 
political bands which have . . . 
 . . . a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they 
should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
✓
 If we decently respect the opinions of mankind, we should declare 
why we have decided to separate.

202 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
 . . . it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it, and to institute 
new Government . . . 
✓
 We may alter or abolish it, and institute new government . . . 
 Prudence, indeed, will dictate that governments long established 
should not be changed for light and transient causes . . .
✓
 If we are prudent, we will not change governments long established 
for light and transient causes.
 . . . all experience hath shewn, that mankind are more disposed to 
suffer, while evils are sufferable . . . 
✓
 We know from experience that we choose to suffer, while we can 
 suffer evils . . . 
 . . . a long train of abuses and usurpations . . . evinces a design to 
reduce them under absolute Despotism.
✓
 We can see a design in a long train of abuses and usurpations 
 pursuing invariably the same Object—to reduce us under absolute 
Despotism.
 Necessity . . . constrains them to alter their former Systems of 
government.
✓
 We now must alter our former Systems of government.
Instead of writing as clearly and directly as he did in Parts 2  
and 3, why in Part 1 did Jefferson choose to write in a style so 
indirect and impersonal? One ready answer is that he wanted to 
lay down a philosophical basis not for our revolution in particu-
lar, but for just revolution in general, a profoundly destabilizing 
idea in Western political thought and one that needed more justi-
fication than the colonists’ mere desire to throw off a government 
they disliked.
What is most striking about the style of Part 1 is not just its 
impersonal generality, but how relentlessly Jefferson uses that 
style to strip the colonists of any free will of their own and to in-
vest agency in higher forces that coerce the colonists to act:
• respect for opinion requires that [the colonists] explain their 
action
•	causes impel [the colonists] to separate
•	prudence dictates that [the colonists] not change government 
lightly
•	experience has shown [the colonists]
•	necessity constrains [the colonists]

 Lesson 12 The Ethics of Style 203
Even when abstractions do not explicitly coerce the colonists, 
Jefferson implies that they are not free agents:
• It [is] necessary to sever bonds.
•	Mankind are disposed to suffer.
•	It is their duty to throw off a tyrant.
In this light, even We hold these truths to be self-evident is a 
claim that implies the colonists did not discover those truths, but 
rather, those truths revealed themselves to the colonists.
In short, Jefferson manipulated his language three times, twice 
in ways that seem transparent, unremarkable, so predictable that 
we don’t even notice the choice: in Part 2, he made King George 
a freely acting agent of his actions by making him the  subject/
topic of every sentence; in Part 3, Jefferson made the  colonists the 
agents of their own actions.
But to make the first part of his argument work, Jefferson had 
to make the colonists seem to be the coerced objects of higher 
powers. Since the only higher power named in the Declaration 
is a Creator, nature’s God, that Creator is implicitly the coercive 
power that “constrains them to alter their former systems of gov-
ernment.” Jefferson did not explicitly say that, much less defend 
it. Instead, he let the grammar of his sentences make that part of 
his argument for him.
The Declaration of Independence is a majestic document 
for reasons beyond its grammar and style. The same words that 
brought our nation into existence laid down the fundamental val-
ues that justify the self-governance of all people everywhere.
But we ought not ignore Jefferson’s rhetorical powers, and in 
particular, the genius of his style. He created a relentlessly logical 
argument justifying our independence, but he also manipulated, 
managed, massaged—call it what you will—his language to sup-
port his logic in ways not apparent on a casual reading.
If his end did not justify his means, we might argue that 
 Jefferson was being deceptive here, using language instead of logic 
to establish the crucial premise of his argument: the colonists 
were not free to do other than what they did; they had no choice 
but to revolt. It is, finally, an ethical issue. Do we trust writers who 
seek to manage our responses not just explicitly with logical argu-
ments but implicitly through their prose style? We would say No 
about the writer of that automobile recall letter, because it was 
almost certainly intended to deceive us. We are, however, likely to 

204 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
say Yes about Jefferson, but only if we agree that his  intended end 
justified his means, a principle that we ordinarily reject on ethical 
grounds.
in youR oWn WoRds
Exercise 12.3
The First Principle of Ethical Writing is to write to others as you  
would  have  them  write  to  you.  Recall  an  occasion  when   
you  violated this principle or were tempted to. What was the 
 situation? What did you do? Would you do anything differently 
now?
Exercise 12.4
We confront ethical issues in writing every day. For one week, 
pay attention to the writing you encounter in your everyday life: 
 labels on products, the fine print on bills, bulk mail advertisements, 
spam in your email account, and so on. Select three of these texts 
that raise ethical issues you would like to talk about, and share 
them with a colleague or with your class. What ethical issues do 
your texts raise? Why do you imagine their writers wrote them as 
they did? How would your texts need to be revised to make them 
ethical?
summing uP
How, finally, do we decide what counts as “good” writing? Is it 
clear, graceful, and candid, even if it fails to achieve its end? Or is 
it writing that does a job, regardless of its integrity and means? We 
have a problem so long as good can mean either ethically sound or 
pragmatically successful.
We resolve that dilemma by our First Principle of Ethical 
Writing:
 We are ethical writers when we would willingly put ourselves in the 
place of our readers and experience what they do as they read what 
we’ve written.
That puts the burden on us to imagine our readers and their 
feelings.

 Lesson 12    The Ethics of Style 205
If you are even moderately advanced in your academic or 
 professional career, you’ve experienced the consequences of un-
clear writing, especially when it’s your own. If you are in your early 
years of college, though, you may wonder whether all this talk 
about clarity, ethics, and ethos is just so much finger- wagging. At 
the moment, you may be happy to find enough words to fill three 
pages, much less worry about their style. And you may be read-
ing textbooks that have been heavily edited to make them clear 
to first-year students who know little or nothing about their con-
tent. So you may not yet have experienced much carelessly dense 
 writing. But it’s only a matter of time before you will.
Others wonder why they should struggle to learn to write 
clearly when bad writing seems so common and appears to cost 
its writers so little. What experienced readers know, and you 
eventually will, is that clear and graceful writers are so few that 
when we find them, we are desperately grateful. They do not go 
unrewarded.
I also know that for many writers crafting a good sentence or 
paragraph gives them pleasure enough. It is an ethical satisfac-
tion some of us find not just in writing, but in everything we do: 
we find joy in doing good work, no matter the job, no matter who 
notices. It is a view expressed with clarity and grace by the philos-
opher Alfred North Whitehead, who identifies a “sense for style” 
in any art or endeavor as an aesthetic and, finally, moral apprecia-
tion for planned ends economically achieved:
The administrator with a sense for style hates waste; the engineer 
with a sense for style economizes his material; the artisan with a 
sense for style prefers good work. Style is the ultimate morality of 
mind.
—Alfred North Whitehead, The Aims of Education

This page intentionally left blank 

207
In music, the punctuation is absolutely strict; the bars  
and rests are absolutely defined. But our prose cannot be quite  
strict, because we have to relate it to the audience. In other  
words we are continually changing the score.
—Sir ralph richardSon
There are some punctuations that are interesting  
and there are some punctuations that are not.
—Gertrude Stein
Understanding PUnctUation
Most writers think that punctuation must obey the same kind 
of rules that govern grammar, and so managing commas and 
 semicolons is about as interesting as making verbs agree with 
 subjects. In fact, you have more choices in how to  punctuate 
than you might think, and if you choose thoughtfully, you can 
help readers not only understand a complex sentence more  easily 
but create nuances of emphasis that they will notice. It takes 
more than a few commas to turn a monotone into the Hallelujah 
 Chorus, but a little care can produce gratifying results.
I will address punctuation as a functional problem: How do 
we punctuate the end of a sentence, then its beginning, and  finally 
its middle? But first, we have to distinguish different kinds of 
sentences.
Appendix i
Punctuation

208 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Simple, Compound, and Complex Sentences
Sentences have traditionally been called simple, compound, and 
complex. If a sentence has just one independent clauSe, it is 
simple:
 
The greatest English dictionary is the Oxford English Dictionary.
If it has two or more independent clauses, it is compound:
 
[There are many good dictionaries]
1
, 
 [but the greatest is the Oxford English Dictionary]
2
.
If it has an independent clause and one or more subordinate 
clauses, it is complex:
 
[While there are many good dictionaries] 
subordinate clause
 
 
[the greatest is the Oxford English Dictionary]. 
independent clause
(Compound-complex is self-explanatory.)
These terms are potentially misleading, because they suggest 
that a grammatically simple sentence should also feel simpler 
than one that is grammatically complex. But that’s not always 
true. For example, to most readers of the next two  sentences, 
the    grammatically  simple  one  feels  more  complex  than  the  
 grammatically  complex  one:
Grammatically Simple:  Our review of the test led to our modification 
of it as a result of complaints by teachers.
Grammatically complex:      After we reviewed the test, we modified it 
because teachers complained.
We need another set of terms that more reliably indicate how 
readers are likely to respond to such sentences.
PUnctUated and grammatical sentences
We can make more useful distinctions between what we will call 
punctuated sentences and grammatical sentences:
•	A punctuated sentence begins with a capital letter and ends 
with a period or question/exclamation mark. It might be one 
word or a hundred.
•	A grammatical sentence is a subject and verb in a main clause 
along with everything else depending on that clause.

 Appendix I Punctuation 209
We distinguish these two kinds of sentences because readers 
can respond to them very differently: the one you are now read-
ing, for example, is one long punctuated sentence, but it is not as 
hard to read as many shorter sentences that consist of many sub-
ordinate clauses; I have chosen to punctuate as one long sentence 
what I might have punctuated as a series of shorter ones: that 
colon, those semicolons, and the comma before that but could 
have been periods, for example—and that dash could have been a  
period too.
Here is that long sentence you just read repunctuated with 
virtually no change in its grammar, creating seven punctuated 
sentences:
 
We must distinguish these two kinds of punctuated sentences 
because readers respond to them very differently. The one you are 
now reading, for example, is a short punctuated sentence, consisting 
of just one subject and one verb plus what depends on them. But 
this paragraph is not as hard to read as many shorter sentences that 
consist of many subordinate clauses. I have chosen to punctuate as 
separate sentences what I could have punctuated as one long one. 
The period before that but, for example, could have been a comma. 
The last two periods could have been semicolons. And that period 
could have been a dash.
Though  I  changed  little  but  the  punctuation,  those  seven  
 grammatical sentences, now punctuated as seven punctuated 
 sentences, feel different from those same grammatical sentences 
in a single punctuated sentence. In short, we can create different 
stylistic effects simply by the way we punctuate: punctuation is 
not governed by rules, but by choices.
PUnctUating the ends of sentences
Above all other rules of punctuation, a writer must know how 
to punctuate the end of a grammatical sentence. You have a lot 
of choices in how to do that, but signal it you must, because  
readers have to know where one grammatical sentence stops and 
the next begins. The punctuation of this one does not help us  
do that:
 
In 1967, Congress passed civil rights laws that remedied problems of 
registration and voting this had political consequences throughout 
the South.

210 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
When  you  write  that  kind  of  sentence  you  create  a  fused  
or run-on  sentence,  an  error  you  cannot  afford  to  make,   
because it signals that a writer does not understand the basics of 
writing.
You can choose to separate pairs of grammatical sentences in 
ten ways. Three are common.
Three Common Forms of End Punctuation
  1.  Period (or Question/Exclamation Mark) Alone The  simplest, 
least noticeable way to signal the end of a grammatical sentence 
is with a period:
✓ 
In 1967, Congress passed civil rights laws that remedied prob-
lems of registration and voting. This had political consequences 
throughout the South.
But if you create too many short punctuated sentences, 
your readers may feel your prose is choppy or simplistic. 
 Experienced writers revise a series of very short  grammatical 
sentences into subordinate clauses or phrases, turning two or 
more grammatical sentences into one:
✓ 
When Congress passed civil rights laws to remedy problems 
of registration and voting in 1967, they had political conse-
quences throughout the South.
✓ 
The civil rights laws that Congress passed in 1967 to remedy 
problems of registration and voting had political consequences 
throughout the South.
Be cautious, though: combine too many short grammatical 
sentences into one long one, and you create a sentence that 
sprawls (see Lesson 10).
  2.  Semicolon Alone    A semicolon is like a soft period; whatever 
is on either side of it should be a grammatical sentence (with 
an exception we’ll discuss on p. 225). Use a semicolon instead 
of a period only when the first grammatical sentence has 
fewer than fifteen or so words, and the content of the second 
grammatical sentence is closely linked to the first:
 
In 1967, Congress passed civil rights laws that remedied problems 
of registration and voting; those laws had political consequences 
throughout the South.
A special problem with semicolons and however In one 
context, even well-educated writers often incorrectly end 

 Appendix I Punctuation 211
one grammatical sentence with a comma and begin the next 
 grammatical sentence with however.
 
Taxpayers have supported public education, however, they now 
object because taxes have risen so steeply.
Those sentences must be separated by a semicolon (but keep 
the comma after however):
✓ 
Taxpayers have supported public education; however, they now 
object because taxes have risen so steeply.
Many writers avoid semicolons because they find them 
mildly intimidating. So learning their use might be worth your 
time, if you want to be judged a sophisticated writer. Once 
 every couple of pages is probably about right.
  3.  Comma + Coordinating Conjunction Readers also are ready 
to recognize the end of a grammatical sentence when they see 
a comma followed by two signals:
•	a coordinating conjunction: and, but, yet, for, so, or, nor
•	another subject and verb
✓ 
In  the  1950s  religion  was  viewed  as  a  bulwark  against  
 communism, so it was not long after that that atheism was 
felt to threaten national security.
✓ 
American intellectuals have often followed Europeans, but our 
culture has proven inhospitable to their brand of socialism.
Choose a period if the two grammatical sentences are long 
and have their own internal punctuation.
When  readers  begin  a  coordinated  series  of  three  or  
more grammatical sentences, they accept just a comma be-
tween them, but only if they are short and have no internal 
punctuation:
✓ 
Baseball satisfies our admiration for precision, basketball speaks 
to our love of speed and grace, and football appeals to our lust for 
violence.
If any of the grammatical sentences has internal punctuation, 
separate them with semicolons:
✓ 
Baseball, the oldest indigenous American sport and essentially a 
rural one, satisfies our admiration for precision; basketball, our 
newest sport and now more urban than rural, speaks to our love 
of speed and grace; and football, a sport both rural and urban, 
 appeals to our lust for violence.

212 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
An exception: Omit the comma between a coordinated pair 
of short grammatical sentences if you introduce them with a 
modifier that applies to both of them:
✓ 
Once the upheaval after the collapse of the Soviet Union had 
 settled down, the economies of its former satellites had begun to 
rebound but Russia’s had yet to hit bottom.
Too many grammatical sentences joined with and or so feel 
simplistic, so avoid more than one or two a page.
Four Less Common Forms of End Punctuation
Some readers have reservations about these next four ways of 
signaling the end of a grammatical sentence, but careful writers 
regularly use them.
 4.  Period + Coordinating Conjunction Some readers think it’s 
wrong to begin a punctuated sentence with a coordinating 
conjunction such as and or but (review p. 14). But they are 
wrong; this is entirely correct:
✓ 
Education  cannot  guarantee  a  democracy.  And  when  it  is  
 available to only a few, it becomes a tool of social repression.
Use this pattern no more than once or twice a page, especially 
with and.
 5.  Semicolon + Coordinating Conjunction Writers occasion-
ally end one grammatical sentence with a semicolon and  begin 
the next with a coordinating conjunction:
✓ 
In the 1950s religion was viewed as a bulwark against commu-
nism; so soon thereafter atheism was felt to threaten national 
security.
Use a comma instead of a semicolon if the two grammatical 
sentences are short. But readers are grateful for a semicolon 
if the two grammatical sentences are long and have their own 
internal commas:
✓ 
Problem solving, one of the most active areas of psychology, has 
made great strides in the last decade, particularly in understand-
ing the problem-solving strategies of experts; so it is no surprise 
that educators have followed that research with interest.
But then readers would probably prefer a period there even 
more.

 Appendix I Punctuation 213
 6.  Conjunction Alone Some writers signal a close link between 
short grammatical sentences with a coordinating conjunction 
alone, omitting the comma:
✓ 
Oscar Wilde violated a fundamental law of British society and we 
all know what happened to him.
But a warning: though writers of the best prose do this, some 
teachers consider it an error.
 7. Comma Alone Readers rarely expect to see just a comma 
used to separate two grammatical sentences, but they can man-
age if the sentences are short and closely linked in meaning,  
such as cause-effect, first-second, if-then, etc.
 
Act in haste, repent at leisure.
Be sure, though, that neither has internal commas; not this:
 
Women, who have always been underpaid, no longer accept that 
discriminatory treatment, they are now doing something about it.
A semicolon would be clearer:
✓ 
Women, who have always been underpaid, no longer accept that 
discriminatory treatment; they are now doing something about it.
But the same warning: though writers of the best prose sepa-
rate short grammatical sentences with just a comma, many 
teachers disapprove, because a comma alone is traditionally 
condemned as a “comma splice,” in their view, a grave error. 
So be sure of your readers before you experiment.
QuiCk TiP: When you begin a grammatical sentence with 
but, you can either put a comma at the end of the previous 
sentence or begin a new punctuated sentence by putting a 
period there and capitalizing but. Use a  period + But if what 
follows is important and you intend to go on discussing it:
✓ The immediate consequence of higher gas prices was some 
curtailment of driving. But the long-term effect changed 
the car buying habits of Americans, perhaps permanently, 
a change that the Big Three car manufacturers could not 
 ignore. They . . .

214 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Three Special Cases: Colon, Dash, Parentheses
These last three ways of signaling the end of a grammatical sen-
tence are a bit self-conscious, but might be interesting to those 
who want to distinguish themselves from most other writers.
  8.  Colon   Discerning readers are likely to think you are a bit 
 sophisticated if you end a sentence with an appropriate colon: 
they take it as shorthand for to illustrate, for example, that is, 
therefore:
✓ 
Dance is not widely supported: no company operates at a profit, 
and there are few outside major cities.
A colon can also signal more obviously than a comma or 
 semicolon that you are balancing the structure, sound, and 
meaning of one clause against another:
✓ 
Civil disobedience is the public conscience of a democracy: mass 
enthusiasm is the public consensus of a tyranny.
If you follow the colon with a grammatical sentence, capital-
ize the first word or not, depending on how much you want to 
emphasize what follows (note: some handbooks claim that the 
first word after a colon should not be capitalized).
Use a comma + but if what follows only qualifies what 
preceded.
✓ The immediate consequence of higher gas prices was some 
curtailment of driving, but that did not last long. The 
long-term effect was changes in the car buying habits of 
 Americans, a change that the Big Three car manufacturers 
could not ignore. They . . .
QuiCk TiP:    Avoid a colon if it breaks a clause into two 
pieces, neither of which is a grammatically complete sentence. 
Avoid this:
 Genetic counseling requires: a knowledge of statistical 
genetics, an awareness of choices open to parents, and the 
psychological competence to deal with emotional trauma.
Instead, put the colon only after a whole subject-verb- object 
structure:

 Appendix I Punctuation 215
✓ Genetic counseling requires the following: a  knowledge 
of statistical genetics, an awareness of choices open to 
 parents, and the psychological competence to deal with 
emotional trauma.
 9.  Dash   You can also signal balance more informally with a 
dash—it suggests a casual afterthought:
✓ 
Stonehenge is a wonder—only a genius could have conceived it.
Contrast that with a more formal colon: it makes a difference.
 10.  Parentheses   You can insert a short grammatical sentence 
inside another one with parentheses, if what you put in the 
parentheses is like a short afterthought. Do not put a period 
after the sentence inside the parenthesis; put a single period 
outside:
✓ 
Stonehenge is a wonder (only a genius could have conceived it).
Here’s the point: You can end a grammatical sentence in 
ten ways. Three are conventional and common:
  1.  PeriodI win. You lose.
  2.  SemicolonI win; you lose.
  3.   Comma + coordinating 
conjunction
I win, and you lose.
Four are a bit debatable, but good writers use them, especially  
the first:
  4.   Period + coordinating conjunctionI win. And you lose.
  5.   Semicolon + coordinating 
conjunction
I win; and you lose.
  6.   Coordinating conjunction aloneI win and you lose.
  7.  Comma  aloneI win, you lose.
Three are for writers who want to be a bit stylish in their 
punctuation:
  8.  ColonI win: you lose.
  9.  DashI win—you lose.
10.  ParenthesesI win (you lose).

216 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Though some ways of punctuating the end of a sentence are 
flat-out wrong, you can choose from among many that are right, 
and each has a different effect. If you look again at the short sen-
tences on pp. 182–183 and Mailer’s long sentence on p. 183, you 
can see those choices in contrast. Those writers could have chosen 
otherwise and thereby created a different stylistic effect.
Intended Sentence Fragments
Most readers will think you’ve made a serious error if you inad-
vertently punctuate a fragment of a grammatical sentence as  
a complete one. Among the most common sentence fragments is  
a subordinate dependent clause detached from its main clause, 
 especially one beginning with because:
 
You cannot break a complex sentence into two shorter ones merely 
by replacing commas with periods. Because if you do, you will be 
considered at best careless, at worst uneducated.
Another common fragment begins with which:
 
Most fragments occur when you write a sentence that goes on so 
long and becomes so complicated that you start to feel that you are 
losing control over it and so need to drop in a period to start another 
sentence. Which is why you must understand how to write a long 
but clearly constructed sentence that readers can follow easily.
Traditionally, a punctuated sentence that fails to include an inde-
pendent main clause is wrong. At least in theory.
In fact, experienced writers often write fragments deliberately, 
as I just did. When intended, those fragments typically have two 
characteristics:
•	They are relatively short, fewer than ten or so words.
•	They are intended to reflect a mind at work, as if the writer 
were speaking to you, finishing a sentence, then immediately 
expanding and qualifying it. Almost as an afterthought, often 
ironically.
In this passage, Mark Twain uses sentence fragments (along 
with sentences beginning with conjunctions) to capture the ele-
ment of chance in the circumstances that made him an author 
(fragments are boldfaced):
   For amusement I scribbled things for the Virginia City Enterprise. . . .  
One of my efforts attracted attention, and the Enterprise sent for me 
and put me on its staff.
         And  so  I  became  a  journalist—another  link.  By  and  by  
Circumstance and the Sacramento Union sent me to the Sandwich 

 Appendix I    Punctuation 217
Islands for five or six months, to write up sugar. I did it; and threw 
in a good deal of extraneous matter that hadn’t anything to do 
with sugar. But it was this extraneous matter that helped me to 
another link. 
       It made me notorious, and San Francisco invited me to lecture. 
Which I did. And profitably. I had long had a desire to travel and see 
the world, and now Circumstance had most kindly and unexpectedly 
hurled me upon the platform and furnished me the means. So I 
joined the “Quaker City Excursion.”
—Mark Twain, The Turning-Point of My Life
You should know, however, that writers rarely use sentence frag-
ments in academic prose. They are considered a bit too casual. If 
you decide to experiment, be sure that your audience can see that 
you know what you’re doing.
Punctuating Beginnings
You have no issues in punctuating the beginning of a sentence 
when you begin directly with its subject, as I did this one. How-
ever, as with this one, when a sentence forces a reader to plow 
through several introductory words, phrases, and clauses, espe-
cially when they have their own internal punctuation and readers 
might be confused by it all (as you may be right now), forget try-
ing to punctuate it right: revise it.
There are a few rules that your readers expect you to follow, 
but more often you have to rely on judgment.
Five Reliable Rules
  1.  Always separate an introductory element from the subject of 
a sentence with a comma if a reader might misunderstand 
the structure of the sentence, as in this one:
 
When a lawyer concludes her argument has to be easily remem-
bered by a jury.
Do this:
✓ 
When a lawyer concludes, her argument has to be easily remem-
bered by a jury.
  2.  Never end an introductory clause or phrase with a semicolon, 
no matter how it long is.    Readers take semicolons to signal the 
end of a grammatical sentence (but see p. 225). Never this:
 
Although the Administration knew that Iraq’s invasion of  Kuwait 
threatened  American  interests  in  Saudi  Arabia;  it  did  not  
 immediately prepare a military response.

218 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Always use a comma there:
✓ 
Although the Administration knew that Iraq’s invasion of  Kuwait 
threatened  American  interests  in  Saudi  Arabia,  it  did  not  
 immediately prepare a military response.
  3.  Never put a comma right after a subordinating conjunction 
if the next element of the clause is its subject.  Never this:
 
Although, the art of punctuation is simple, it is rarely mastered.
  4.  Avoid putting a comma after the coordinating conjunctions 
and, but, yet, for, so, or, and nor if the next element is the 
subject.    Do not do this:
 
But, we cannot know whether life on other planets exists.
Some writers who punctuate heavily put a comma after a 
 coordinating or subordinating conjunction if an introductory 
word or phrase follows:
✓ 
Yet, during this period, prices continued to rise.
✓ 
Although, during this period, prices continued to rise, interest 
rates did not.
Punctuation that heavy retards a reader a bit, but it’s your 
choice. These are also correct and for the reader, perhaps a bit 
brisker:
✓ 
Yet during this period, prices continued to rise.
✓ 
Yet during this period prices continued to rise.
  5.  Put a comma after an introductory word or phrase if it com-
ments on the whole of the following sentence or connects 
one sentence to another. These include elements such as 
fortunately, allegedly, etc. and connecting adverbs like however, 
nevertheless, otherwise, etc. Readers hear a pause after such 
words.
✓ 
Fortunately, we proved our point.
But avoid starting many sentences with an introductory ele-
ment and a comma. When we read a series of such sentences, 
the whole passage feels hesitant.
Three Exceptions: We typically omit a comma after now, 
thus, and hence:
✓ 
Now it is clear that many will not support this position.
✓ 
Thus the only alternative is to choose some other action.

 Appendix I Punctuation 219
Two Reliable Principles
  1.  Readers usually need no punctuation between a short 
 introductory phrase and the subject:
✓ 
Once again we find similar responses to such stimuli.
✓ 
 in 1945 few realized how the war had transformed us.
It is not wrong to put a comma there, but it slows readers just 
as you may want them to be picking up speed.
  2.  Readers usually need a comma between a long (four or 
five words or more) introductory phrase or clause and the 
subject:
✓ 
When a lawyer begins her opening statement with a dry recital of 
the law and how it must be applied to the case before the court, 
the jury is likely to nod off.
Here’s the point:  These are strong rules of punctuation. 
 Observe  them.
 1. Always separate an introductory element from the 
 subject if a reader might misunderstand the structure of 
the sentence.
 2. Never end an introductory clause or phrase with a 
semicolon.
 3. Do not put a comma after a subordinating conjunction 
if the next element of the clause is its subject.
 4. Do not put a comma after a coordinating conjunction 
if the next element of the clause is its subject.
 5. Put a comma after a short introductory word or phrase 
if it comments on the whole of the following sentence 
or if it connects one sentence to another.
These are reliable principles:
 1. Put a comma after a short introductory phrase or not, 
as you choose.
 2. Readers  need  a  comma  after  a  long  introductory  
phrase or clause.

220 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
PUnctUating middles
This is where explanations get messy, because to punctuate inside 
a grammatical sentence—more specifically, inside a clause—you 
have to consider not only the grammar of that clause, but also 
the nuances of rhythm, meaning, and the emphasis that you want 
readers to hear in their mind’s ear. There are, however, a few 
 reliable  rules.
Subject—Verb, Verb—Object
Do not put a comma between a subject and its verb, no matter 
how long the subject (nor between the verb and its object). Do not 
do this:
 
A sentence that consists of many complex subordinate clauses and 
long phrases that all precede a verb, may seem to some students to 
demand a comma somewhere.
If you keep subjects short, you won’t feel that you need a comma.
Occasionally, you cannot avoid a long subject, especially if it 
consists of a list of items with internal punctuation, like this:
 
The  president,  the  vice  president,  the  secretaries  of  the  
departments, senators, members of the House of Representatives, 
and Supreme Court justices take an oath that pledges them to 
uphold the Constitution.
You can help readers sort it out with a summative subject:
•	Insert a colon or a dash at the end of the list of subjects.
•	Add a one-word subject that summarizes the preceding list:
✓ 
The  president,  the  vice  president,  the  secretaries  of  the  
departments, senators, members of the House of Representatives, 
and Supreme Court justices: all take an oath that pledges them to 
uphold the Constitution.
Choose a dash or a colon depending on how formal you want to 
seem.
Interruptions
When you interrupt a subject-verb or verb-object, you make it 
harder for readers to make the basic grammatical connections 
that create a sentence. So in general, avoid such interruptions, 
 except for reasons of emphasis or nuance (see p. 147).

 Appendix I Punctuation 221
If you must interrupt a subject and verb or verb and object 
with more than a few words, always put paired commas around 
the interruption.
✓ 
A sentence, if it includes subordinate clauses, may seem to need 
commas.
Generally speaking, do not use a comma when you tack on 
a subordinate clause at the end of an independent clause, if that 
clause is necessary to understand the meaning of the sentence 
(this is analogous to a restrictive relative clause):
✓ 
No one should violate the law just because it seems unjust.
If the clause is not necessary, separate it from the main clause 
with a comma.
✓ 
No one should violate the law, because in the long run, it will do 
more harm than good.
This distinction can be tricky at times.
You may locate adverbial phraSeS before, after, or in the mid-
dle of a clause, depending on the emphasis you want readers to 
hear. If in the middle, put a comma before and after. Compare the 
different emphases in these:
✓ 
in recent years modern poetry has become more relevant to the 
 average  reader.
✓ 
Modern poetry has, in recent years, become more relevant to  
the average reader.
✓ 
Modern poetry has become, in recent years, more relevant to the 
average reader.
✓ 
Modern poetry has become more relevant to the average reader in 
recent years.
Loose Commentary
“Loose commentary” differs from an interruption, because you 
can usually move an interruption elsewhere in a sentence. But 
loose commentary modifies what it stands next to, so it usually 
cannot be moved. It still needs to be set off with paired commas, 
parentheses, or dashes, unless it comes at the end of a sentence; in 
that case, replace the second comma or dash with a period.
It is difficult to explain exactly what counts as loose commen-
tary because it depends on both grammar and meaning. One fa-
miliar distinction is between restrictive clauses and nonrestrictive 
clauses (see pp. 15–16), including appoSitiveS.

222 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
We use no commas with restrictive modifiers, modifiers that 
uniquely identify the noun they modify:
✓ 
The house that i live in is 100 years old.
But we always set off nonrestrictive modifiers with paired commas 
(unless the modifier ends the sentence):
✓ 
We had to reconstruct the larynx, which is the source of voice, 
with cartilage from the shoulder.
An appositive is just a truncated nonrestrictive clause:
✓ 
We had to rebuild the larynx, which is the source of voice, with 
cartilage from the shoulder.
You can achieve a more casual effect with a dash or parenthesis:
✓ 
We had to rebuild the larynx—the source of voice—with cartilage 
from the shoulder.
✓ 
We had to rebuild the larynx (the source of voice) with cartilage 
from the shoulder.
A dash is useful when the loose commentary has internal commas. 
Readers are confused by the long subject in this sentence:
 
The nations of Central Europe, Poland, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, 
the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Bosnia, Serbia have for centuries been 
in the middle of an East-West tug-of-war.
They can understand that kind of structure more easily when they 
can see that loose modifier set off with dashes or parentheses:
✓ 
The nations of Central Europe—Poland, Hungary, Romania, 
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Bosnia, Serbia—have for 
centuries been in the middle of an East-West tug-of-war.
Use parentheses when you want readers to hear your comment as 
a sotto voce aside:
✓ 
The brain (at least that part that controls nonprimitive functions) 
may comprise several little brains operating simultaneously.
Or use it as an explanatory footnote inside a sentence:
✓ 
Lamarck (1744–1829) was a pre-Darwinian evolutionist.
✓ 
The poetry of the fin de siècle (end of the century) was characterized 
by a world-weariness and fashionable despair.

 Appendix I Punctuation 223
When loose commentary is at the end of a sentence, use a 
comma to separate it from the first part of the sentence. Be cer-
tain, however, that the meaning of the comment is not crucial to 
the meaning of the sentence. If it is, do not use a comma. Contrast 
these:
✓ 
I wandered through Europe, seeking a place where I could write 
undisturbed.
✓ 
I spent my time seeking a place where I could write undisturbed.
✓ 
Offices will be closed July 2–6, as announced in the daily bulletin.
✓ 
When closing offices, secure all safes as prescribed in the manual.
✓ 
Historians have studied social changes, at least in this country.
✓ 
These records must be kept at least until the iRS reviews them.
Here’s the point:  These are reliable rules of internal 
 punctuation. Observe them.
 1. Do not interrupt a subject and verb or verb and object 
with any punctuation, unless absolutely necessary for 
clarity.
 2. Inside a clause, always set off long interruptions with 
paired marks of punctuation—commas, parentheses, 
or dashes. Never use semicolons.
 3. Put a comma at the end of an independent clause before 
a tacked-on subordinate clause when that clause is not 
essential to the meaning of the sentence.
PUnctUating coordinated elements
Punctuating Two Coordinated Elements
Generally speaking, do not put a comma between just two coordi-
nated elements. Compare these:
 
As computers have become sophisticated, and powerful they have 
taken over more clerical, and bookkeeping tasks.
✓ 
As computers have become sophisticated and powerful they have 
taken over more clerical and bookkeeping tasks.

224 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Four Exceptions
  1.  For  a  dramatic  contrast,  put  a  comma  after  the  first  
 coordinate element to emphasize the second (keep the sec-
ond short):
✓ 
The ocean is nature’s most glorious creation, and its most 
destructive.
To emphasize a contrast, use a comma before a but (keep the 
second part short):
✓ 
Organ transplants are becoming more common, but not less 
expensive.
  2.  if you want your readers to feel the cumulative power of a 
coordinated pair (or more), drop the and and leave just a 
comma. Compare:
✓ 
Lincoln never had a formal education and never owned a large 
library.
✓ 
Lincoln never had a formal education, never owned a large 
library.
✓ 
The lesson of the pioneers was to ignore conditions that seemed 
difficult or even overwhelming and to get on with the business of 
subduing a hostile environment.
✓ 
The lesson of the pioneers was to ignore conditions that seemed 
difficult or even overwhelming, to get on with the business of 
subduing a hostile environment.
  3.  Put a comma between long coordinated pairs only if you 
think your readers need a chance to breathe or to sort out 
the grammar. Compare:
 
It is in the graveyard that Hamlet finally realizes that the inevi-
table end of life is the grave and clay and that the end of all 
pretentiousness and all plotting and counter-plotting, regardless 
of one’s station in life, must be dust.
A comma after clay signals a natural pause:
✓ 
It is in the graveyard that Hamlet finally realizes that the inevi-
table end of all life is the grave and clay, and that the end of all 
pretentiousness and all plotting and counter-plotting, regardless 
of one’s station in life, must be dust.
More important, the comma after clay sorts out the structure 
of a potentially confusing grave and clay and that regardless.

 Appendix I Punctuation 225
In this next sentence, the first half of a coordination is long, 
so a reader might have a problem connecting the second half 
to its origin:
 
Conrad’s Heart of Darkness brilliantly dramatizes those primitive 
impulses that lie deep in each of us and stir only in our darkest 
dreams but asserts the need for the values that control those 
impulses.
A comma after dreams would clearly mark the end of one 
 coordinate member and the beginning of the next:
✓ 
Conrad’s Heart of Darkness brilliantly dramatizes those primitive 
impulses that lie deep in each of us and stir only in our darkest 
dreams, but asserts the need for the values that control those 
impulses.
On the other hand, if you can make sense out of a compli-
cated sentence like that only with punctuation, you need to 
revise the sentence.
  4.  if a sentence begins with a phrase or subordinate clause 
modifying two following clauses that are independent and 
coordinated, put a comma after the introductory phrase or 
clause but do not put a comma between the two coordinated 
independent clauses:
✓ 
After the Soviet Union collapsed, Russia’s economy declined for 
several years [no comma here] but the economies of former satel-
lites to the west began to expand.
Punctuating Three or More Coordinated Elements
Finally, there is the matter of punctuating a series of three or more 
coordinated elements. Writers disagree on this one. A few omit it, 
but most insist a comma must always precede the last one:
✓ 
His wit, his charm and his loyalty made him our friend.
✓ 
His wit, his charm, and his loyalty made him our friend.
Both are correct, but be consistent.
If any of the items in the series has its own internal commas, 
use semicolons to show how readers should group the coordi-
nated items:
✓ 
In mystery novels, the principal action ought to be economical, 
organic,  and  logical;  fascinating,  yet  not  exotic;  clear,  but  
complicated enough to hold the reader’s interest.

226 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
aPostroPhes
There are few options with apostrophes, only rules, and they are 
Real Rules (review pp. 12–13). Those who violate them are objects 
of abuse by those who police such matters.
Contractions
Use an apostrophe in all contracted words:
don’t        we’ll        she’d        I’m        it’s
Writers in the academic world often avoid contractions in their 
professional writing, because they don’t want to seem too casual. 
I’ve used them in this book, because I wanted to avoid a formal 
tone. Check with your instructor before you experiment.
Plurals
Except for two cases, never use an apostrophe to form a plural. 
Never this: bus’s, fence’s, horse’s. That error invites withering 
abuse.
Use an apostrophe to form plurals in only two contexts: (1) with  
all lower case single letters and (2) with the single capital letters 
A, I, and U (the added s would seem to spell the words As, Is,  
and Us):
 
Dot your i’s and cross your t’s many A’s and I’s
However, when a word is unambiguously all numbers or multiple 
capital letters, add just s, with no apostrophe:
The    ABCs        the    1950s        767s
              CDs              URLs              45s
Possessives
With a few exceptions, form the possessive of a singular common 
or proper noun by adding an apostrophe + s.
 
FDR’s third term         the U.S.’s history         a 747’s wingspan
Here’s the point: Use commas to separate items in a 
 series if the items have no internal punctuation. Use semico-
lons to set off items in a series if they do.

 Appendix I Punctuation 227
The exceptions include singular nouns that already end in s or 
with the sound of s. For these, add the apostrophe only:
politics’ importancethe United States’ role
Descartes’ Discourse on MethodSophocles’ plays
the audience’ attentionfor appearance’ sake
(Some handbooks give different advice on this issue, recommend-
ing ’ + s in all cases. Whatever you choose, be consistent.)
For plural common and proper nouns that end in s, form the 
possessive by adding an apostrophe only.
workers’ votes     the Smiths’ house
Form the possessive of a singular compound noun by adding 
an apostrophe and s to the last word:
the attorney general’s decision         his sister-in-law’s business
Exercise A.1
This passage lacks its original punctuation. Slash marks indicate 
grammatical sentences. Punctuate it three times, once using the 
least punctuation possible, a second time using as much varied 
punctuation as you can, and then a third time as you think best. 
You might also analyze the passage for features of elegance, es-
pecially how the sentences begin and end. You can even improve 
them some.
  1.  Scientists and philosophers of science tend to speak as if 
 “scientific language” were intrinsically precise as if those 
who use it must understand one another’s meaning even if 
they  disagree / but in fact scientific language is not as differ-
ent from ordinary language as is commonly believed / it too 
is subject to imprecision and ambiguity and hence to imper-
fect understanding / moreover new theories or arguments are 
rarely if ever constructed by way of clear-cut steps of induction 
deduction and verification or falsification / neither are they de-
fended rejected or accepted in so straightforward a manner / in 
practice scientists combine the rules of scientific methodology 
with a generous admixture of intuition aesthetics and philo-
sophical commitment / the importance of what are sometimes 
called extra-rational or extra-logical components of thought in 
the discovery of a new principle or law is generally acknowl-
edged / . . . but the role of these extra-logical components in 

228 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Summing up
Rather than summarize this detailed material, I offer just four bits 
of advice:
•	Always signal the end of a grammatical sentence.
•	Always observe the five reliable rules on pp. 217–218.
•	Always set off long interrupting elements with commas.
•	Never put a single comma between a subject and its verb or 
between a verb and its object.
 persuasion and acceptance in making an argument convincing 
is less frequently discussed partly because they are less visible /  
the ways in which the credibility or effectiveness of an argu-
ment depends on the realm of common experiences or exten-
sive practice in communicating those experiences in a common 
language are hard to see precisely because such commonalities 
are taken for granted / only when we step out of such a “con-
sensual domain” when we can stand out on the periphery of a 
community with a common language do we begin to become 
aware of the unarticulated premises mutual understandings 
and assumed practices of the group / even in those subjects 
that lend themselves most readily to quantification discourse 
depends heavily on conventions and interpretation conven-
tions that are acquired over years of practice and participation 
in a community.
—Evelyn Fox Keller, A Feeling for the Organism:  
The Life and Work of Barbara McClintock
Exercise A.2
Repeat Exercise A.1 with a passage of your own writing.  Remove 
all of the punctuation, and put slash marks between grammati-
cal sentences. Then punctuate the passage using as little punc-
tuation as possible and again using as much varied punctuation 
as possible. (I am assuming that you punctuated the passage 
originally as you thought best.) Share all three passages—
the one with  
minimal punctuation, the one with much varied 
 punctuation, and the  original—with a reader. Which did your 
reader prefer? Why?

 Appendix I Punctuation 229
Beyond that, use your judgment: punctuate in ways that help your 
readers see the connections and separations that they have to see 
to make sense of your sentences. That means you must put your-
self in the place of your reader, not easy to do, but something you 
must learn. On the other hand, write a clearly structured sentence 
in the first place, and your punctuation will take care of itself.

230
Everything of importance has been said before  
by somebody who did not discover it.
—Alfred North WhiteheAd
There is not less wit nor less invention in applying  
rightly a thought one finds in a book, than in being  
the first author of that thought.
—Pierre BAyle
Using soUrCes ProPerly
Few writers can get by on their own thoughts alone, and a 
 researcher never can. We all write better when our thinking is 
 enriched by what we learn from others. But there are rules for 
using the words and ideas of others: some that readers use to 
judge your ethos, how trustworthy you seem; and others that you 
ignore to your peril. Mistakes here can damage your credibility, 
your grade, and even your reputation for honesty. You have some 
choices, but not many. Your challenge is to learn and follow a plan 
that helps you use sources properly and without costly errors, but 
also without having to reduplicate and re-reduplicate your efforts.
Although there are rules for quotations and other uses of 
sources, I will, as always, emphasize your readers and the choices 
you make with them in mind: not what you must do to follow the 
rules, but what you can do to assure readers that you have dealt 
with your sources accurately and fairly.
Appendix ii
Using Sources

 Appendix II Using Sources 231
avoiding the aPPearanCe of Plagiarism
I begin with those matters where mistakes are most costly. Of all 
the ethical transgressions that a writer can commit, few are worse 
than plagiarism: lying and other forms of deception are worse, but 
not far behind is the theft of another person’s words and ideas.
The plagiarist steals more than words. He or she also steals 
the respect and recognition due to others for their work. And the 
student plagiarist steals not only words and ideas, but the recog-
nition due to his colleagues by making their work seem worse in 
comparison to his own. When such theft becomes common, the 
 community grows suspicious, then distrustful, then cynical—So 
who cares? Everyone does it. Teachers then have to be concerned 
less with teaching and learning, and more with detecting dishon-
esty. Those who plagiarize do not just betray a duty owed a source; 
they fray the ethical fabric of their entire community.
Honest students who never intend to plagiarize might think 
they have no reason to fear being charged with doing so. But 
we read words, not minds. You invite at least the appearance of 
 dishonesty if you don’t know or, worse, don’t take care to avoid 
what might make teachers suspect it.
Three Principles
To avoid that risk, you must understand and follow the principles 
that every teacher expects every writer to observe. The overrid-
ing principle is this: avoid anything that might lead an informed 
reader to think that you are taking credit for words or ideas not your 
own. This principle applies to sources of any kind: print,  online, 
recorded, or oral. Some students think that if something is freely 
circulated online, they are free to treat it as their own. They are 
wrong: cite everything you borrow.
In particular, follow these rules:
  1.  When you quote the exact words of a source, cite the source 
(including page numbers) and put those words in quotation 
marks or in a block quotation (see pp. 234–235).
  2.  When you paraphrase a source, cite the source (including 
page numbers). You do not need quotation marks, but you 
must recast it entirely in your own words in a new sentence 
structure.
  3.  When you use an idea or method you found in a source, cite 
the source. If the entire source concerns the idea or method, 
do not add page numbers.

232 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
If you follow these three rules, you will never be suspected of 
 trying to pass off someone else’s words and ideas as your own.
Take Good Notes
To use and cite source material correctly, you must start by tak-
ing good notes. Since the work can be tedious, set up a system to 
get things right the first time so that you don’t have to check and 
recheck, again and again.
  1.  Record bibliographical information the first time you touch 
a source. Do this early, not when you are rushing to meet a 
deadline.
For books, recordFor articles, record
❑
  author(s)
❑
  title (and subtitle)
❑
  title of series (if any)
❑
  edition or volume (if any)
❑
  city and publisher
❑
  year published
❑
  pages for chapter (if any)
❑
  author(s)
❑
  title (and subtitle)
❑
  journal, magazine, etc.
❑
  volume and issue number
❑
  online database (if any)
❑
  date published
❑
  pages for article
 Online sources are less predictable. In addition to the above 
information, record at least the URL and the access date, and 
any other information that might help you identify the source 
for readers.
  2.  Record quotations exactly. Copy quotations exactly as they 
appear in the original, down to every comma and semicolon.  
If the quotation is long, photocopy or download it.
  3.  Mark quotations and paraphrases unambiguously as the 
words of others. This is crucial: take notes so that weeks or 
months later you cannot possibly think that words and ideas 
from a source are your own. Whether you take notes longhand 
or on a computer, always highlight, underline, or use a differ-
ent font to distinguish direct quotations. Then use another way 
to distinguish paraphrases and summaries. Prominent scholars 
have been humiliated by accusations of plagiarism because, they 
claimed, they did not clearly mark words they copied or para-
phrased, then “forgot” they were not their own.
  4.  Don’t paraphrase too closely. When you paraphrase a source 
in your notes, you must do more than merely replace words in 

 Appendix II    Using Sources 233
the source with synonyms. That is also considered plagiarism, 
even if you cite the source. For example, the first paraphrase 
 below is plagiarism because it tracks its sentence structure 
 almost word for word. The second paraphrase is fair use.
 
Original:  The drama is the most social of literary forms, 
since it stands in so direct a relationship to its 
audience.
 
Plagiarized:  The theater is a very social genre because it relates 
so directly with its viewers.
 
Fair use:  Levin claims that we experience the theater as the 
most social form of literature because we see it 
taking place before us.
Using QUotations in YoUr text
You use quotations best when you integrate them so fully that 
they seem made for your text. Readers become suspicious when 
they see bare quotations dropped into your paper with no effort 
to connect them to your own points: Is it you or your source that’s 
doing all the thinking? So prepare readers for each quotation by 
stating before you use it how the quotation fits into the mesh of 
your argument. Then make the fit between the quotation and your 
text as seamless as possible.
Four or Fewer Lines
Drop in the Quotation An acceptable but artless way to insert a 
quotation into your text is simply to drop it in, introducing it with 
something like
 
Smith says, states, claims, etc. As Smith says, asserts, suggests, etc.
 
According to Smith, In Smith’s view, etc.
The verb indicates your attitude toward the quotation, so choose 
carefully:
 
says vs. asserts vs. claims vs. suggests vs. thinks vs. wants to believe
Put a comma after the introductory phrase and capitalize the  
first  letter  of  the  quotation  only  if  it  was  capitalized  in   
the quotation:
 
Williams said, “An acceptable but artless way to insert a quotation 
into your text is simply to drop it in.”

234 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
If you introduce the quotation with stated that, claimed that,  
said that, etc., do not use a comma and do not capitalize the first 
letter:
 
He went on to say that “if you introduce the quotation with stated 
that, claimed that, said that, etc., do not use a comma.”
Weave in the Quotation A more graceful way to use a quotation 
is to weave it into the structure of your own sentence (doing that 
also helps you incorporate it into your own thinking):
 
In The Argument Culture, Deborah Tannen treats the male-female 
polarity “more like ends of a continuum than a discrete dualism,” 
because the men and women we know display “a vast range of 
behaviors, personalities, and habits.”
To make the quotation fit your sentence, you can modify its 
grammar, even add a word or two, so long as you follow these 
principles:
•	Don’t change its meaning.
•	Indicate added or changed words with square brackets.
•	Signal deletions with three spaced dots, called ellipses.
This sentence quotes the original intact:
 
Although it is clear that we have long thought of argument as verbal 
combat, Deborah Tannen suggests that there is something new 
in the way we argue: “The increasingly adversarial spirit of our 
contemporary lives is fundamentally related to a phenomenon that 
has been much remarked upon in recent years: the breakdown of a 
sense of community.”
This version both shortens and modifies the quotation to fit the 
grammar of the writer’s sentence:
 
Although it is clear that we have long thought of argument as verbal 
combat, Deborah Tannen suggests that our “increasingly adversarial 
spirit . . . is fundamentally related” to new social developments in 
“the breakdown of a sense of community.”
If you delete a whole sentence or more, use four ellipses.
You can italicize, boldface, or underline words in a quota-
tion to emphasize them, but if you do, always add my emphasis or 
 emphasis mine in square brackets:
 
Lipson recommends that when you paraphrase you “write it down in 
your own words [my emphasis] . . . and then compare your sentence 
with the author’s original.”

 Appendix II Using Sources 235
Five Lines or More
If you quote five lines or more, put the quotation into a block 
 quotation (with no quotation marks around it). Indent the same 
number of spaces as you indent a paragraph; if the quotation 
 begins with a paragraph indentation, indent the first line again:
Lipson offers this advice about paraphrase:
So, what’s the best technique for rephrasing a quote? Set aside 
the other author’s text and try to think of the point you want to 
get across. Write it down in your own words (with a citation) 
and then compare your sentence to the author’s original. If they 
 contain several identical words or merely substitute a couple of 
synonyms, rewrite yours.
As in that example, introduce most block quotations with 
words that announce it, followed by a period or colon. But you 
can also let the quotation complete the grammar of your introduc-
tory sentence. In that case, punctuate the end of your sentence as 
if you were running the block quotation into your text:
 
A good way to avoid paraphrasing too closely is to 
    think of the point you want to get across. Write it down in your 
own words (with a citation) and then compare your sentence to 
the author’s original. If they contain several . . .
Never begin a quotation in your running text and complete it 
in a block quotation, like this:
 
A good way to avoid paraphrasing too closely is to “think of the 
point”you want to get across. Write it down in your own words 
(with a citation) and then compare your sentence to the author’s 
original. If they . . .
Five Words or Less
If you repeat just a few words from a source, you may have to treat 
them as quotations. If they are words that anyone might use, treat 
them as your own. But if they are strikingly original or especially 
important, put them in quotation marks and cite their source. For 
example, read this passage from Jared Diamond’s Guns, Germs, 
and Steel:
 Because technology begets more technology, the importance of 
an invention’s diffusion potentially exceeds the importance of the 
original invention. Technology’s history exemplifies what is termed 
an autocatalytic process: that is, one that speeds up at a rate that 
increases with time, because the process catalyzes itself.

236 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Phrases such as the importance of the original invention are so 
 ordinary that they require neither a citation nor quotation marks. 
But two phrases do, because they are so striking: technology begets 
more technology and autocatalytic process:
 
The power of technology goes beyond individual inventions because 
technology “begets more technology.” It is, as Diamond puts it, an 
“autocatalytic process.”
Once you cite those words, you can use them again without quota-
tion marks or citation:
 
As one invention begets another one and that one still another, the 
process becomes a self-sustaining catalysis that spreads exponentially 
across all national boundaries.
Punctuating Quotations
Here are three principles for using punctuation with quotation 
marks:
  1.  If the quotation ends in a period, comma, semicolon, or 
 colon, replace it with the punctuation you need in your  
own sentence.
•	If your punctuation is a period or comma, put it before a 
final quotation mark:
 
President Nixon said, “I am not a crook.”
 
Falwell claimed, “This is the end,” but he was wrong.
•	If your punctuation is a question mark, colon, or semico-
lon, put it after the final quotation mark:
 
My first bit of advice is “Quit complaining”; my second is “Get 
moving.”
 
The Old West served up plenty of “rough justice”: lynchings and 
other forms of casual punishment were not uncommon.
 
How many law professors believe in “natural law”?
 
Was it Freud who famously asked, “What do women want”?
  2.  If the quotation ends with a question mark or exclamation 
point and your punctuation is a period or comma, drop your 
punctuation and put the question mark before the quotation 
mark:
 
Freud famously asked, “What do women want?”

 Appendix II Using Sources 237
  3.  If you use quotation marks inside a quotation, put your 
comma or period before both of the marks:
 
She said, “I have no idea how to interpret ‘Ode to a Nightingale.’”
Cite Sources Appropriately
Your  last  task  is  to  cite  your  sources  fully,  accurately,  and  
  appropriately.  No  one  will  accuse  you  of  plagiarism  for  a  
 misplaced comma, but some will conclude that if you cannot get 
these little matters right, you can’t be trusted on the big ones. 
There are many styles of citations, so find out which one your 
reader expects. Three are most common:
•	Chicago style, from the University of Chicago Manual of Style, 
common in the humanities and some social sciences
•	MLA style, from the Modern Language Association, common 
in literary studies
•	APA style, from the American Psychological Association, 
 common in the social sciences
You can find a guide to citations in the reference section of almost 
any bookstore or online.
sUmming UP
To use sources accurately, fairly, and effectively, follow three 
principles:
  1.  Give credit to a source whenever you use its words or ideas.
•	Whenever you use the exact words of a source, cite the 
source and page numbers and put the words in quotation 
marks or a block quote.
•	Whenever you paraphrase a source, cite the source and page 
numbers.
•	Whenever you rely on the ideas or methods of a source, cite 
the source.
  2.  Make each quotation fit seamlessly into your text.
•	Before you use it, indicate how each quotation relates to 
your ideas.
•	Whenever possible, don’t just drop in a quotation: weave  
it in.

238 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
	Run in quotations of four lines or less.
	Set off as a block a quotation of five lines or more.
	Quote distinctive words or phrases the first time you use 
them.
  3.  Use a standard citation style. Three are most common:
•	Chicago style, common in the humanities and some social 
sciences
•	MLA style, common in literary study
•	APA style, common in the social sciences
When you use material from a source, you create a chain of think-
ing that passes from you to your sources, from them to their 
sources, and on to their sources, and on, and on. That chain of 
thinking must also be a chain of trust. You can trust your sources 
(and through them, their sources) if they show you that they have 
taken care not only with their own ideas but also with what they 
borrowed from others. If, in turn, you want your readers to trust 
you, you have to show them that you too have taken care. These 
principles help you do that.

239
GLossARY
Grammar is the ground of all.
—William langland
Most of the grounds of the world’s troubles are matters of grammar.
—montaigne
There is a satisfactory boniness about grammar which the flesh of 
sheer vocabulary requires before it can become vertebrate and walk 
the earth. But to study it for its own sake, without relating it to 
function, is utter madness.
—anthony Burgess
Thou hast most traitorously corrupted the youth of the realm in 
erecting a grammar school. . . . It will be proved to thy face, that 
thou hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and a verb, 
and such abominable words as no christian ear can endure to hear.
—William shakespeare, 2 henry Vi, 4.7
W
hat follows is no tight theory of grammar, just definitions 
useful for the terms in this book. Where the text discusses 
something at length, I refer you to those pages. If you want to do 
a quick review to get started, read the entries on suBject, simple 
suBject, Whole suBject, and VerB.
Action: Prototypically, action is expressed by a verb: move, 
hate, think, discover. But actions also appear in nominalizations: 
 movement, hatred, thought, discovery. Actions are also implied in 
some adjectives: advisable, resultant, explanatory, etc.

240 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Active: See p. 53.
Adjectival Clause: Adjectival clauses modify nouns. Also called 
relatiVe clauses, they usually begin with a relative pronoun: 
which, that, whom, whose, who. There are two kinds: restrictiVe 
and nonrestrictiVe. See pp. 15–16.
Restrictive The book that I read was good.
Nonrestrictive My car, which you saw, is gone.
Adjective: A word you can put very in front of: very old, very 
 interesting. There are exceptions: major, additional, etc. Since 
this is also a test for adVerBs, distinguish adjectives from  adverbs 
by putting them between the and a noun: The occupational 
 hazard, the major reason, etc. Some nouns also appear there—the 
 chemical hazard.
Adjective Phrase: An adjectiVe and what attaches to it: so full 
that it burst.
Adverb: Adverbs modify all parts of speech except nouns:
Adjectives extremely large, rather old
Verbs frequently spoke, often slept
Adverbs very carefully, somewhat rudely
Articles precisely the man I meant, just the thing I need
Sentences Fortunately, we were on time.
Adverb Phrase: An adverb and what attaches to it: as soon as   
I could.
Adverbial Clause: This is a kind of suBordinate clause.  It  
 modifies  a VerB or adjectiVe, indicating time, cause, condition, 
etc. It usually begins with a suBordinating conjunction such as 
because, when, if, since, while, unless:
If you leave, I will stop. Because he left, I did too.
Agent: Prototypically, agents are flesh-and-blood sources of an 
action, but for our purposes, an agent is the seeming source of 
any action, an entity without which the action could not occur: 
She criticized the program in this report. Often, we can make the 
means by which we do something a seeming agent: This report 
criticizes the program. Do not confuse agents with 
suBjects. Agents 
prototypically are subjects, but an agent can be in a grammatical 
oBject: I underwent an interrogation by the police.

                                                                                                            Glossary                                                                                                            241
Appositive: A noun phrase that is left after deleting which and 
be: My dog, which is a dalmatian, ran away.
Article: They are easier to list than to define: a, an, the, this, these, 
that, those.
Character: See pp. 29–30.
Clause: A clause has two defining characteristics:
  1.  It has a sequence of at least one 
suBject + VerB.
  2.  The verb must agree with the subject in number and can be 
made past or present.
By this definition, these are clauses:
She left     that they leave     if she left     why he is leaving
These next are not, because the verbs cannot be made past tense 
nor do they agree in number with the putative subject:
for them to go                her    having gone
Comma Splice: You create a comma splice when you join two 
 independent clauses with only a comma:
Oil-producing countries depend too much on oil revenues, they 
should develop their educational and industrial resources, as well. 
See p. 213.
Complement: Whatever completes a VerB:
I am home.            You    seem    tired.            She    helped    me.
Compound Noun: See p. 62.
Conjunction: Usually defined as a word that links words, phrases, 
or clauses. They are easier to illustrate than define (the first two 
are also categorized as suBordinating conjunctions):
adverbial conjunctions because, although, when, since
relative conjunctions who, whom, whose, which, that
sentence conjunctions thus, however, therefore, nevertheless
coordinating conjunctions and, but, yet, for, so, or, nor
correlative  conjunctions    both  X  and  Y,  not  only  X  but  Y,   
(n)either X (n)or Y, X as well as Y

242 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Coordination: Coordination joins two grammatical units of the 
same order with and, or, nor, but, yet:
same part of speech you and I, red and black, run or jump
phrases in the house but not in the basement
clauses when I leave or when you arrive
Dangling Modifier: See p. 163.
Dependent Clause: Any clause that cannot be punctuated as a 
main clause, one beginning with a capital letter and ending with 
a period or question mark. It usually begins with a subordinating 
conjunction such as because, if, when, which, that:
why he left         because he left         which he left
Direct Object: The noun that follows a transitiVe VerB and can 
be made the suBject of a passiVe verb:
I found the money.  →  The money was found by me.
Finite Verb: A VerB that can be made past or present. These 
are  finite verbs because we can change their tense from past to 
 present and vice versa:
She wants to leave.  →  She wanted to leave.
These are not finite verbs because we cannot change the infinitiVe 
to a past tense:
She wants to leave.  →  She wanted to left.
Fragment: A phrase or dependent clause that begins with 
a      capital  letter  and  ends  with  a  period,  question  mark,  or  
 exclamation  mark:
Because I left.         Though I am here!         What you did?
These are complete sentences:
He left because Though I am here, I know what
I did. she is not! we did.
Free Modifier: See pp. 154–155.
Gerund: A 
nominalization created by adding -ing to a VerB:
When she left we were happy.  →  Her leaving made us happy.

                                                                                                            Glossary                                                                                                            243
Goal: That toward which the action of a VerB is directed. In most 
cases, goals are direct oBjects:
I see you.            I    broke    the dish.            I    built    a house.
But in some cases, the literal goal of an action can be the suBject 
of an actiVe VerB:
I underwent an interrogation.         She received a warm welcome.
Grammatical Sentence: See p. 208.
Hedge: See pp. 135–136.
Independent Clause: A clause that that can be punctuated as a 
grammatical sentence.
Infinitive: A VerB that cannot be made past or present. It often is 
preceded by the word to: He decided to stay. But sometimes not: 
We helped him repair the door.
Intensifier: See pp. 136–137.
Intransitive Verb: A verb that does not take an oBject and so 
 cannot be made passiVe. These are not transitiVe verbs:
He exists.            They    left    town.            She    became a doctor.
Linking Verb: A VerB with a complement that refers to its suBject.
He is my brother.     They became    teachers.        She    seems reliable.
Main Clause: A main or independent clause has at least a suBject 
and VerB (imperatives are the exception) and can be punctuated 
as an independent sentence:
I    left.                Why    did    you    leave?                We    are    leaving.
A suBordinate or dependent clause cannot be punctuated as an 
independent sentence. These are incorrectly punctuated:
Because she left.         That they left.         Whom you spoke to.
Main Subject: suBject of the main clause.
Metadiscourse: See pp. 58–59.
Nominalization: See pp. 32–33.
Nonrestrictive Clause: See pp. 16–17.
Noun: A word that fits this frame: The [ ] is good. Some are con-
crete: dog, rock, car; others are abstract: ambition, space, speed. 

244 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
The nouns that most concern us are nominalizations, nouns 
 derived  from VerBs or adjectiVes: act → action, wide → width.
Noun Clause: A noun clause functions like a noun, as the suBject 
or oBject of a VerB: That you are here proves that you love me.
Object: There are three kinds:
  1.  
direct object: the noun following a transitiVe VerB:
I read the book.    We    followed the car.
  2.  prepositional object: the noun following a preposition:
in the house by the walk across the street with fervor
  3.  indirect object: the noun between a VerB and its direct object:
I gave him a tip.
Parallel: Sequences of coordinated words, phrases, or clauses 
are parallel when they are of the same grammatical structure. 
This is parallel:
I decided to work hard and do a good job.
This is not:
I decided to work hard and that I should do a good job.
Passive: See p. 53–56.
Past Participle: Usually the same form as the past tense -ed: 
jumped, worked. Irregular VerBs have irregular forms: seen, broken,  
swum, etc. It follows forms of be and have: I have gone. It was 
found. It sometimes serves as a modifier: found money.
Personal Pronoun: Easier to list than define: I, me, we, us, my, 
mine; our, ours; you, your, yours; he, him, his; she, her, hers; they, 
them, their, theirs.
Phrase: A group of words constituting a unit but not including 
a suBject and a finite VerB: the dog, too old, was leaving, in the 
house, ready to work.
Possessive: my, your, his, her, its, their or a noun ending with -’s 
or -s’: the dog’s tail.
Predicate: Whatever follows the whole 
suBject, beginning with 
the VerB phrase, including the complement and what attaches to it:
He [left yesterday to buy a hat]. 
predicate

                                                                                                            Glossary                                                                                                            245
Preposition: Easier to list than to define: in, on, up, over, of, at, 
by, etc.
Prepositional Phrase: The preposition plus its oBject: in + the 
house.
Present Participle: The -ing form of a VerB: running, thinking.
Progressive: The 
present participle form of the VerB: Running 
streams are beautiful.
Punctuated Sentence: See p. 208.
Relative Clause: See pp. 146–147.
Relative Pronoun: who, whom, which, whose, that when used in 
a relative clause.
Restrictive Clause: See pp. 15–16.
Resumptive Modifier: See pp. 153–154.
Run-on Sentence: A punctuated sentence consisting of two or 
more grammatical sentences not separated by either a coordinating  
conjunction or any mark of punctuation this entry illustrates a 
run-on sentence.
Simple Subject: The simple subject is the smallest unit inside 
the Whole suBject that determines whether a VerB is singular or 
plural:
[The [books] 
simple subject
 that are required reading] 
whole subject
 are listed.
The simple subject should be as close to its verb as you can get it.
If a book is required reading, it is listed.
Stress: See pp. 83–84.
Subject: The subject is what the VerB agrees with in number:
Two men are at the door.         One man is at the door.
Distinguish the Whole suBject from its simple suBject.
Subjunctive: A form of the VerB used to talk about events that are 
contrary to fact:
If he were President . . .
Subordinate  Clause:  A  clause  that  usually  begins  with  a  
 suBordinating conjunction such as if, when, unless, or which, 

246 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
that, who. There are three kinds of subordinate clauses: noun, 
 adVerBial, and adjectiVal.
Subordinating Conjunction: because, if, when, since, unless, 
which, who, that, whose, etc.
Summative Modifier: See p. 154.
Thematic Thread: A sequence of 
themes running through a 
passage.
Theme: See pp. 88–90.
Topic: See pp. 72–73.
Topic String: The sequence of topics through a series of sentences.
Transitive Verb: A VerB with a direct oBject. The direct object 
prototypically “receives” an action. The prototypical direct object 
can be made the suBject of a passiVe verb:
We read the book.  →  The book was read by us.
By this definition, resemble, become, and stand (as in He stands six 
feet tall) are not transitive.
Verb: The word that must agree with the suBject in number and 
that can be inflected for past or present:
The book is    ready.            The    books    were returned.
Whole Subject: You can identify a whole subject once you 
 identify  its VerB: Put a who or a what in front of the verb and turn 
the sentence into a question. The fullest answer to the question is 
the whole subject:
The ability of the city to manage education is an accepted fact.
Question: What is an accepted fact?
Answer  (and  whole  subject):  the  ability  of  the  city  to  manage  
education
Distinguish the whole subject from the simple suBject:
The ability of the city to manage education is an accepted fact.

247
SuggeSted AnSwerS
Y
ou will almost certainly come up with answers different from 
these, many much better. Don’t worry whether yours are word-
for-word like mine; focus only on the general principle of the lesson 
and exercise.
exerciSe 3.2
Subjects are underlined, verbs capitalized, characters  italicized, 
and actions boldfaced.
 1a.   There is opposition among many voters to nuclear power plants 
based on a belief in their threat to human health.
 1b.   Many voters 
oppose nuclear power plants because they believe that 
such plants 
threaten human health.
 3a.   There 
is a belief among some researchers that consumers’ choices 
in fast food restaurants 
would be healthier if there were postings of 
nutrition information in their menus.
 3b.   Some researchers 
believe that consumers would choose healthier 
foods if fast food companies 
posted nutrition information in their 
menus.
 5a.   Because  the student’s preparation for the exam 
was thorough, none 
of the questions on it 
were a surprise.
5b.  Because the student 
prepared thoroughly for the exam, she was not 
surprised by any of the questions on it.
exerciSe 3.4
 1a. Verbs: argue, elevate. No nominalizations.
 1b.   Verbs: has  been.  Nominalizations:  speculation,  improving,  
achievement.
 3a. Verbs: identified, failed, develop, immunize. Nominalizations: risk.
 3b. Verbs: met. Nominalizations: attempts, defining, employment, failure.

248 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
 5a. Verbs: resulted. Nominalizations: loss, share, disappearance.
5b.  Verbs:  discover, embrace, teach. No nominalizations.
 7a. Verbs: fail, realize, are unprepared, protect, face. Nominalizations: life.
7b.  Verbs:  have, are. Nominalizations: understanding, increases, resistance,  
costs, education.
exerciSe 3.5
 1b. Some educators have speculated about whether families can improve 
educational achievement (help students achieve more).
 3b. Economists have attempted but failed to define full employment.
 5a.  When domestic automakers lost market share to the Japanese, hun-
dreds of thousands of jobs disappeared.
7b.  Colleges now understand that they can no longer increase tuition 
yearly because parents are strongly resisting the soaring cost of 
higher education.
exerciSe 3.6
 1.    Lincoln hoped to preserve the Union without war, but when the 
South attacked Fort Sumter, war became inevitable.
  3. Business executives predicted that the economy would quickly revive.
  5. Because the health care industry cannot control costs, the public may 
decide that Congress must act.
  7.    Several candidates attempted to explain why more voters voted in 
this year’s elections.
  9.    The business sector did not independently study why the trade 
 surplus suddenly increased.
exerciSe 3.7
There are many plausible alternatives here, depending on the 
characters we invent.
  1.    Although we use models to teach prose style, students do not write 
more clearly or directly.
  3.    If members depart from established procedures, the Board may ter-
minate their membership.
  5. To implement a new curriculum successfully, faculty must cooperate 
with students to set goals that they can achieve within a reasonable 
time.

 Suggested Answers 249
exerciSe 4.1
 1. We were required to explain the contradictions among the data.
  3.    In recent years, historians have interpreted the discovery of  America 
in new ways, leading them to reassess the place of Columbus in 
 Western  history.
  5.    Medical professionals usually decide on-scene whether to forcibly 
medicate patients who are unable to legally consent.
  7. Although critics panned the latest installment of the series, loyal fans 
still loved it.
  9.    We were disappointed but not surprised when they rejected the pro-
posal, because we expected that they had made a political decision.
exerciSe 4.2
 1.    Those on welfare become independent when they learn skills val-
ued by the marketplace. [I like the passive here in order to stress 
“marketplace.”]
  3.    In this article, I argue that the United States fought the Vietnam 
War to extend its influence in Southeast Asia and did not end it un-
til North Vietnam made it clear that it could be defeated only if the 
United States used atomic weapons.
exerciSe 4.3
 1.    We believe that students binge because they do not understand the 
risks of alcohol.
  3.    We suggest that Russia’s economy has improved because it has ex-
ported more crude oil for hard currency.
  5.    In Section IV, I argue that the indigenous culture overcultivated the 
land and thereby exhausted it as a food-producing area.
  7.    To evaluate how the flow rate changed, the current flow rate was 
compared to the original rate on the basis of figures collected by 
 Jordan in his study of diversion patterns of slow-growth swamps. 
[This sentence technically has a dangling modifier, but it is so com-
mon that no reader of technical prose would balk. That last clump of 
nominalizations is acceptable, because it is a technical term.]

250 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
exerciSe 4.4
 1.    When the author treats the conspiracy theories, he abandons his 
impassioned narrative style and adopts a cautious one, but when he 
picks up the narrative line again, he invests his prose with the same 
vigor and force.
  3.    We have undervalued how the brain solves problems because we 
have not studied it in scientifically reliable ways.
exerciSe 4.6
 1.    Diabetic patients may reduce their blood pressure by applying renal 
depressors.
  3.    On the basis of these principles, we may now attempt to formulate 
rules for extracting narrative information.
  5. The Federal Trade Commission must be responsible for enforcing the 
guidelines for the durability of new automobile tires.
exerciSe 5.1
 1.    When the president assumed office, he had two aims—the recovery 
of . . . He succeeded in the first as testified to by the drop in . . . But 
he had less success with the second, as indicated by our increased 
involvement . . . Nevertheless, the American voter was pleased by vast 
increases in the military . . .
exerciSe 5.2
 1.    Except for those areas covered with ice or scorched by contin-
ual heat, the earth is covered by vegetation. Plants grow most 
richly in fertilized plains and river valleys, but they also grow at 
the edge of perpetual snow in high mountains. Dense vegetation 
grows in the ocean and around its edges as well as in and around 
lakes and swamps. Plants grow in the cracks of busy city side-
walks as well as on seemingly barren cliffs. Vegetation will cover 
the earth long after we have been swallowed up by evolutionary 
history.
  3.    In his paper on children’s thinking, Jones (1985) stressed the impor-
tance of language skills in the ability of children to solve problems. 
He reported that when children improved their language skills, they 
improved their ability to solve nonverbal problems. Jones thinks 
that they performed better because they used previously acquired 
language habits to articulate the problems and activate knowledge 

 Suggested Answers 251
learned through language. We might therefore explore whether 
 children could learn to solve problems better if they practiced how to 
formulate them.
exerciSe 6.1
One can imagine different rationales for different stresses.
  1. In my opinion, at least, the Republic is most threatened by the Presi-
dent’s tendency to rewrite the Constitution.
  3.    In large American universities the opportunities for faculty to work 
with individual students are limited.
  5.    College students commonly complain about teachers who assign a 
long term paper and then give them a grade but no comments.
exerciSe 6.2
 1.    During the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the story of King Lear and his 
daughters was so popular that by the time she died, readers could 
find it in at least a dozen books. Most of these stories, however, did 
not develop their characters and were simple narratives with an ob-
vious moral. Several versions of this story must have been available 
to Shakespeare when he began work on Lear, perhaps his greatest 
tragedy. But while he based his characters on these stock figures of 
legend, he turned them into credible human beings with complex 
motives.
  3.    Because the most important event in Thucydides’ History is Athens’ 
catastrophic Sicilian Invasion, Thucydides devotes three-quarters 
of his book to setting it up. We can see this anticipation especially 
in how he describes the step-by-step decline in Athenian society so 
that he could create the inevitability that we associate with the tragic 
drama.
exerciSe 9.1
 1.    Critics must use complex and abstract terms to analyze literary texts 
meaningfully.
  3.    Graduate students face an uncertain future at best in finding good 
teaching jobs.
  5.    Most patients who go to a public clinic do not expect special treat-
ment, because their health problems are minor and can be easily 
treated.

252 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
  7. We can reduce the federal deficit only if we reduce federal spending.
  9.    A person may be rejected from a cost-sharing educational program 
only if that person receives a full hearing into why she was rejected. 
Or: An agency may reject a person from . . . only when that agency 
provides a full hearing into why it rejected her.
 11. If we pay taxes, the government can pay its debts.
 13.  Catholics and Protestants will reconcile only when they agree on the 
Pope’s authority.
exerciSe 9.3
 1.    On the other hand, some TV programming will always appeal to our 
most prurient interests.
   3.     One  principle  governs  how  to  preserve  the  wilderness  from  
exploitation.
  5. Schools transmit more social values than do families.
exerciSe 10.1
 1.    To explain why Shakespeare had Lady Macbeth die off-stage, we 
must understand how the audience reacted to Macbeth’s death.
  3.    A student’s right to access his records generally takes precedence 
over an institution’s desire to keep those records private, unless the 
student agrees to limits on his rights during registration.
  5.    Regardless of its justification, such conduct is prejudicial to good 
order.
  7.    Cigarette companies no longer claim that smoking does not cause 
heart disease and cancer.
  9.    Employers have had no difficulty identifying skilled employees, even 
though teachers, administrators, and even newspapers continue to 
debate grade inflation.
11.  Parents and students need to understand how serious it is to bring 
to school anything that looks like a weapon, since, as school officials 
have said, principals may require students to pass through metal de-
tectors before entering a school building.

 Suggested Answers 253
exerciSe 10.2
 1.    Many school systems are returning to the basics, basics that have 
been the foundation of education for centuries./ . . . a change that is 
long overdue . . . /trying to stem an ever rising drop-out rate.
  3.    For millennia, why we age has been a puzzle, a puzzle that only now 
can be answered with any certainty./ . . . a mystery that we can an-
swer either biologically or spiritually./ . . . hoping that one day we 
might stop our inevitable decline into infirmity and death.
  5.    Many Victorians were appalled when Darwin suggested that their 
 ancestry might include apes, a suggestion that seemed to be at odds 
with Christian teaching/ . . . a reaction deeply rooted in  Victorian 
 religious beliefs/ . . . objecting to a perceived challenge to their 
 religious  convictions.
  7.    Journalism has increasingly focused on stories that were once con-
sidered salacious gossip, stories that would not have been seen as 
news even a decade ago/ . . . a trend that signals the decline of jour-
nalism as a profession/ . . . catering to a seemingly incessant demand 
for titillating news.
exerciSe 11.1
 1.    Those who argue stridently over small matters are unlikely to think 
clearly about large ones.
  3. We should pay more attention to those politicians who tell us how to 
make what we have better than to those who tell us how to get what 
we don’t have.
  5.    Some teachers mistake neat papers that rehash old ideas for great 
thoughts wrapped in impressive packaging.
exerciSe 11.2
 1.    If we invest our sweat in these projects, we must avoid appearing to 
be working only for our own self-interest.
  3. Throughout history, science has progressed because dedicated scien-
tists have ignored the hostility of an uninformed public.
  5. Boards of education can no longer expect that taxpayers will support 
the extravagancies of incompetent bureaucrats.

254 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
exerciSe 12.1
As the Illinois Commerce Commission has authorized, you will have to 
pay . . . You have not had to pay . . . , but you will now pay rates that 
have been restructured consistent with the policy of The Public Utilities 
Act that lets us base what you pay on what it costs to provide you with 
service.
As the Illinois Commerce Commission has authorized, we are charging 
you . . . We have not raised rates . . . but we are restructuring the rates 
now . . . so that we can charge you for what we pay to provide you with 
service.
exerciSe 12.2
Your car may have a defective part that connects the suspension to the 
frame. If you brake hard and the plate fails, you won’t be able to steer. 
We may also have to adjust the secondary latch on your hood because we 
may have misaligned it. If you don’t latch the primary latch, the second-
ary latch might not hold the hood down. If the hood flies up while you 
are driving, you won’t be able to see. If either of these things occurs, you 
could crash.
exerciSe A.1
Here are the two passages, first with the least punctuation I can 
imagine, and then with much more.
  1.    Scientists and philosophers .  .  . precise, as if those .  .  . disagree. 
But in fact scientific language .  .  . believed. It too is subject to .  .  . 
 understanding. Moreover, new theories or arguments are rarely if ever 
constructed by way of clear-cut steps of induction, .  .  .   falsification. 
Neither are they defended, rejected or accepted in so straightforward 
a manner. In practice scientists combine .  .  . of intuition, aesthetics 
commitment. The importance . . . generally acknowledged. . . . But 
the role of .  .  . less visible. The ways in .  .  . common experiences, on 
extensive practice .  .  . taken for granted. Only when we step out of 
such a “consensual domain,” when we can stand out .  .  . the unar-
ticulated premises, mutual understandings and assumed practices 
of the group. Even in those subjects .  .  . to quantification, discourse 
depends heavily on conventions and interpretation, conventions that 
are acquired over years of practice and participation in a community.
      Scientists and philosophers of science .  .  . were intrinsically precise, 
as if those who use it .  .  . meaning, even if they disagree. But, in fact, 
scientific language .  .  . commonly believed: it, too, is subject to im-
precision and ambiguity, and hence to imperfect understanding. 

 Suggested Answers 255
Moreover, new theories, or arguments, are rarely, if ever, constructed 
by way of clear-cut steps of induction, deduction, and verification or 
falsification; neither are they defended, rejected, or accepted in so 
straightforward a manner. In practice, scientists combine the rules of 
scientific methodology with a generous admixture of intuition, aes-
thetics, and philosophical commitment. The importance of what are, 
sometimes, called extra-rational, or extra-logical components of .  .  . 
law is generally acknowledged. .  .  . But the role of these extra-logical . . .  
frequently discussed, partly because they are less visible. The ways 
in which the credibility, or effectiveness, of an argument depends on 
the realm of common experiences, on extensive practice .  .  . a com-
mon language, are hard to see precisely, because such commonalities 
are taken for granted. Only when we step out of such a “consensual 
domain,” when we can stand . . . language, do we begin to become 
aware of the unarticulated premises, mutual understandings, and as-
sumed practices of the group. Even in those subjects .  .  . quantifica-
tion, discourse depends heavily on conventions and interpretation, 
conventions that . . . participation in a community.

256
Acknowledgments
From Armies of the Night. Norman Mailer, New York: The New 
American Library, Inc., 1971.
From Science  and  the  Common  Understanding  by  J.  Robert  
 Oppenheimer. Copyright © 1954 by J. Robert Oppenheimer, 
 renewed © 1981 by Robert B. Meyner. Reprinted by permission.
From “The Aims of Education” in The Aims of Education and Other 
Essays by Alfred North Whitehead. Copyright © 1929 by  Macmillan  
Publishing  Co.,  Inc.,  renewed  ©  1957  by  Evelyn  Whitehead.  
 Reprinted by permission.
From Strunk, William, Jr. and White, E. B. The Elements of Style 
4th ed. Copyright © 1999 by Pearson Education. Reprinted by 
permission.

257
Index
Abstractions,
as characters, 51–53
Academese, 3
accept vs. except, 22
Action,
clarity, 39, 43
consequences, 38–39
nominalization pattern, 36–37, 42–43
principles
characters and subjects, 29–30
judgment, 28–29
revision, characters and
analyze and rewrite, 35–36
diagnose, 35
sentence structure, 44–45
topic/subject/agent, 199–200
verbs and, 32–33
writing, 30–32
adjective vs. nominalization, 32–33
affect vs. effect, 22
aggravate vs. annoy, 21
although,
vs. but, 155
Annan, Noel Gilroy, 16
anticipate vs. expect, 21
anxious vs. eager, 21
Apostrophes,
contractions and plurals, 226
possessives, 226–227
Arnold, Matthew, 1
Aronowitz, Stanley, 196
Babba, Homi K., 195
Barzun, Jacques, 14, 15
Bayle, Pierre, 230
because,
beginning with, 216
blackmail vs. coerce, 21
Blair, Hugh, 9
Blake, William, 143
Brand, Myles, 51
Bureaucratese, 3
Burns, Bobby, 11
Chadwick, Douglas, 5
Characters,
absent, 49–50
as abstractions, 51–52
and actions, 35–36
conjunctions, 48–49
prohibition, 59
in scientific writing, 57
importance, 46–47
metadiscourse, 58–61
noun, 62–63
“objective” passive vs. I/We, 57
and passive verbs, 53–54, 58–61
passive vs. active, 54–56
preparations, 58
revision, 48–49
Chiasmus, 175–176
Clarity,
and cohesion, 63–64
costs and benefits, 122–123
principles of, 199–200
actions and verbs, 30
characters, 29–30
Coherence,
clarity principle, 120–123
vs. cohesion, 71
concepts, reader, 113
costs and benefits, 122–123
distractions, sentence, 75–76
fake, 77
flow of, 71–72
global, 113–124
monotony, 76–77
consistency, 77
topic, 77
on paragraphs, 119–120
reading vs. writing, 69–70
requirements
document order, 118
relevance, 117–118
revision
diagnose and analysis, 73–74
rewrite, 74
structure, paragraph, 115–117
subject, 72–73
themes, 114–117
topic, 73–74
understanding, 67, 113–114
Cohesion,
avoid passives, 68–69
faked, 77
revision
begin sentences, 69
end sentences, 69–70
sentences, 69
cohort vs. consort, 21
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 46
comprise vs. constitute, 21
Concision,
Metadiscourse, 142
hedges, 135–136
intensifiers, 136–137
topic, 134–135
principle
adjectives and adverbs, 131
doubled words, 127–128
implied words, 128–129
meaningless words, 127
negatives to affirmatives, 130–131
phrase replacement, 129–130
sentence, shape
hedges and intensifiers, 142
implications, 141
indirect negatives, 142
meaningless words, 141
phrase, 142
terse, 139–140

258 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Concision (Continued)
understanding of, 126–127
continual vs. continuous, 21
Cooper, James Fenimore, 4
Coordination, 156–157
balanced, 169–171
with correlative conjunctions, 159
learning, 160–162
short vs. long, 157–158
structure, 158
Correctness,
attractive words, 21–22
choice, 9–10
gender bias, 23–25
grammar rules, 10–11
group, invented rules
elegant options, 17–19
folkfore, 14–17
hobgoblins, 19–21
invented rules, 12–13
pronouns, 22–23
rules observation, 13
social and real rules, 12
understanding, 9–10
Crichton, Michael, 5, 6
criteria vs. criterion, 22
Darwin, Charles, 98
data vs. datum, 22
Declaration of Independence,
clarity, 199–200
major premise, 197
minor premise, 197
separation, 199
style, 201–204
Dewey, John, 98
discrete vs. discreet, 22
disinterested vs. uninterested, 21
Einstein, Albert, 98, 188
Elegance,
balanced coordination, 169–171
characteristics, passage, 185
climactic emphasis, 173–177
chiasmus, 175–176
echoing salience, 175
suspension, 176–177
of 1 weighty word, 174–175
weighty words, 173–174
elements, 177–181
end on strength, sentence, 177
features of, 173
length and rhythm, 181–184
resumptive modifiers, 178–179
uncoordinated balance, 171–173
understanding, 168–169
Eliot, T. S., 80
Emphasis,
and coherence, 88–91
complexity meaning, 81–82
diagnosing, 84–86
grammatical complexity, 81
information, 85–86
phrases and clauses, 82–83
revision
information, 85
not only X, but Y, 86
passives, 85–86
pronoun substitution, 86
it/there/what, 85, 86
sentence, 80–81
stress, 83–84
themes, 90–91
topics, 89–90
End punctuation,
colon, 214
comma, 213
comma 1 coordinating conjunction, 211–212
conjunction, 213
dash and parentheses, 215
period 1 coordinating conjunction, 212
period/question/exclamation mark, 210
semicolon, 210–211
semicolon 1 coordinating conjunction, 212
enormity vs. enormous, 22
Erasmus, 9
Ethics,
analysis, 197–204
Declaration of Independence
major premise, 197
minor premise, 197
separation, 199
intended misdirection, 191–194
necessary complexity, 194–195
responsibilities, writers and readers, 189–190
salutary complexity/subversive clarity, 195–196
style, 188–189
unintended obscurity, 190
except vs. accept, 22
Faked cohesion, 77
Fallows, James, 177
famous vs. notorious, 22
fewer vs. less, 16–17
finalize vs. finish, 20
Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 126
Follett, Wilson, 14
fortuitous vs. fortunate, 22
Fowler, Francis, 15
Franklin, Benjamin, 66
Free modifiers, 154–156
fulsome vs. much, 22
Gass, William, 28, 188
Gibbon, Edward, 174
Gilbert, John P., 57
Goldstein, Tom, 5
Gowers, Sir Ernest, 18
Grammar,
group, invented rules
elegant options, 17–19
folkfore, 14–17
invented rules, 12–13
social and real rules, 12
Hedges, 135–136
Hoffman, Eva, 156
Hofmann, Hans, 126
hopefully, 13
vs. hope, 20
I, prohibition, 58
in scientific writing, 59
imply vs. infer, 22
Intensifiers, 136–137
Introduction,
conclusion, 108–109
prelude, 106–107
problem, 99–100, 101–104
conceptual, 102, 103–104
parts, 102

                                                                                                                Index                                                                                                                259
practical, 102, 103
revision, 107–108
shared context, 100–101
solution, 105–106
conceptual problems, 106
practical problems, 105
understanding, 98–99
irregardless vs. regardless, 10, 21
Jefferson, Thomas, 197–204
Johnson, Samuel, 168
Keller, Evelyn Fox, 228
Kennedy, John F., 8
Legalese, 3
like vs. as, 20
Lippmann, Walter, 169, 170
MacDonald, Dwight, 17
Mailer, Norman, 183
Márquez, Gabriel García, 113
Maugham, Somerset, 168
McPeek, Bucknam, 57
Mencken, H. L., 8
Metadiscourse, 58–59
hedges, 135–136
intensifiers, 136–137
topic, 134–135
Mill, John Stuart, 143
Mills, C. Wright, 5
Moore, Marianne, 126
Mosteller, Frederick, 57
Motivation,
understanding, 98–99
much vs. fulsome, 22
Mulcaster, Richard, 3
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 27
Nominalization,
common pattern, 36–37, 42–43
by prepositions, 37
qualifications, 42–43
verb and adjective, 32–33
none,
singular verb with, 19
not only X, but Y, 86
Noun, 62–63
Oates, Joyce Carol, 178
Ong, Walter, 14
Orwell, George, 2, 4, 19
Paine, Thomas, 4
Paragraphs,
principles of, 119–120
structure, 115–116
Passive vs. active,
and character, 58–59
choose, 54–56
cohesion, 63–64
difference, 54
discourse, 57–61
point of view, 55–56
responsibility, 54–55
revision, 52, 60–61
as sentence, 55
phenomena vs. phenomenon, 22
Phrases and clauses, 82–83
Plagiarism,
appearance of, 231
principles of, 231–232
Plato, 97
Pound, Ezra, 182
Prelude, 106–107
principal vs. principle, 22
Problem,
conceptual, 102, 103–104
parts, 102
practical, 102, 103
proceed vs. precede, 22
Pronoun, 22–23, 86
Punctuation,
apostrophes
contractions and plurals, 226
possessives, 226–227
beginnings
principles, 219
rules, 217–218
coordinated elements, 223
exception, 224–225
end
colon, 214
comma, 213
comma 1 coordinating conjunction, 211–212
conjunction, 213
dash and parentheses, 215
period 1 coordinating conjunction, 212
period/question/exclamation mark, 210
semicolon, 210–211
semicolon 1 coordinating conjunction, 212
and grammatical sentences, 208–209
middle
interruption, 220–221
loose commentary, 221–223
subject–verb, verb–object, 220
sentence fragments, 216–217
simple, compound and complex sentences, 208
understanding, 207
Quiller-Couch, Sir Arthur, 2
Quincey, Thomas De, 66
Quotations,
five lines or more, 235
five words or less, 235–236
four or fewer lines, 233–234
punctuating, 236–237
Reading, using principles for, 7
and characters, 73
and coherence, 113–114, 117–118
and complex style, 69
and subjects, 49
Reading vs. writing, 69–70
Redundancy
Metadiscourse, 142
hedges, 135–136
intensifiers, 136–137
topic, 134–135
rewording, 140
Reshaping,
clauses vs. phrases, 152–153
coordination, 156–157
deletion/cut, 152–153
free modifiers, 154–155
long sentences
grammatical structure, 160–162
modifiers, 163–164
unclear connection, 162–163
resumptive modifier, 153–154
subordinate clauses vs. independent sentences, 153
summative modifiers, 154
Resumptive modifier, 153–154, 178–179

260 Style: Lessons in Clarity and Grace
Richardson, Sir Ralph, 207
Russell, Bertrand, 187
Sentence,
beginnings, 83
principles, 219
rules, 217–218
and coherence, 88–91
cohesion, 69
distraction, 75
and emphasis, 80–95
end, 80–82, 84
colon, 214
comma, 213
comma 1 coordinating conjunction, 211–212
conjunction, 213
dash and parentheses, 215
period 1 coordinating conjunction, 212
period/question/exclamation mark, 210
semicolon, 210–211
semicolon 1 coordinating conjunction, 212
middle
interruption, 220–221
loose commentary, 221–223
subject–verb, verb–object, 220
order
chronological, 118
coordination and logical, 118
revision
information, 85
not only X, but Y, 86
passives, 85–86
pronoun substitution and ellipsis, 86
right words, 85–86
sequence, 70
shape
excessive metadiscourse, 142
hedges and intensifiers, 142
implications, 141
indirect negatives, 142
meaningless words, 141
pairs, modifiers and categories, redundant, 
141
phrase, 142
themes, 90–91
topics, 89–90
trimming, 92
Shakespeare, William, 28, 80
Shape,
design principle, 158
short vs. long, 157–158
long sentences
coordination, 162
grammatical structure, 160–162
modifiers, 163–164
principles of, 148–150
unclear connection, 162–163
principles of, 165–167
reshaping
clauses vs. phrases, 152–153
coordination, 156–157
deletion/cut, 152–153
free modifiers, 154–155
resumptive modifier, 153–154
subordinate clauses vs. independent  
sentences, 153
summative modifiers, 154
revision, sprawl
long openings, 145
long abstract subject, 146
subject-verb connection, 147
verb-object connection, 147–148
understanding, 143–144
Shaw, George Bernard, 168
Solution, 105–106
conceptual problems, 106
practical problems, 105
Source,
citation, 237
notes, 232–233
principles, 231–232
use, 230
Sprat, Thomas, 3
Stein, Gertrude, 143, 207
Sterne, Laurence, 125
strata vs. stratum, 22
Stress, 83–84
Style,
in Declaration of Independence, 201–204
clarity and understanding, 2–3
unclear writing
causes of, 6–7
history of, 3–6
Subject/character analysis, 34, 39–42
Subordinate clauses vs. independent  
sentences, 153
Summative modifiers, 154
Tannen, Deborah, 131
than, 11, 12
that, 15–16
Trotsky, Leon, 182
Twain, Mark, 4, 182–183, 216–217
Unclear writing,
causes of, 6–7
history of, 3–6
unique, 20
Verb/action analysis, 34, 39–42
Verbs and actions,
principle, 32–33
revision
analysis and rewrite, 35–36
diagnose, 35
nominalization pattern, 36–37
verb vs. nominalization, 32–33
which,
beginning with, 216
which vs. that, 13, 15–16
while vs. since, 17
White, E. B., 9
Whitehead, Alfred North, 188, 205, 230
who vs. whom, 18–19
Wilde, Oscar, 2
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 27
Writing,
intended misdirection, 191–194
principles, 2–3
professional, 30–32
and reading, 7
and rewriting, 7–8
unclear
causes of, 6–7
history of, 3–6
unintended obscurity, 190
you,
as main character, 50

Ten PrinciPles for  
WriTing coherenTly
  1.  In your introduction, motivate readers to read carefully by 
stating a problem they should care about (pp. 99–105).
  2.  State your point, the solution to the problem, at or near the 
end of that introduction (pp. 105–106).
  3.  In that point, introduce the important concepts that you will 
develop in what follows (pp. 88–90).
  4.  Make everything that follows relevant to your point  
(pp. 117–118).
  5.  Make it clear where each part/section begins and ends  
(p. 114–115).
  6.  Order parts in a way that makes clear and visible sense  
to your readers (p. 118–119).
  7.  Open each part/section with its own short introductory  
segment (p. 115–117).
  8.  Put the point of each part/section at the end of that opening 
segment (pp. 115–117).
  9.  Begin sentences that form a unit with consistent  
subjects/topics (pp. 71–73).
 10. Create cohesive old-new ties between sentences (pp. 68–70).
